---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
A Historical Institutionalist Understanding of Participatory Governance and Aboriginal
Peoples: The Case of Policy Change in Ontario's Mining Sector
Author(s): J. Andrew Grant, Dimitrios Panagos, Michael Hughes and Matthew I.
Mitchell
Source: Social Science Quarterly , DECEMBER 2014, Vol. 95, No. 4 (DECEMBER 2014), pp.
978-1000
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/44072730

Understanding of Participatory
Governance and Aboriginal Peoples:
The Case of Policy Change in Ontario's
Mining Sector*
J. Andrew Grant, Queens University
Dimitrios Panagos, Memorial University of Newfoundland

Michael Hughes, Queen s University
Matthew I. Mitchell, Saint Paul University

Objective. Natural resource policy has been a constant source of conflict between
"Aboriginal" and "non-Aboriginal" stakeholders in Canada. We employ a historica
institutionalist analysis to examine the extent to which changes to the Canadian
Constitution in 1 982 and Ontario's Mining Act in 2009 enabled Aboriginal communities to become equal partners in participatory governance arrangements in
mineral resource sectors. Methods. We analyze primary sources consisting of federal and provincial legislation and in-person interviews conducted across Ontario

in 2010. Results. The existing Canadian mining policy paradigm, while un
der significant pressure, has not yet been displaced by a new policy paradigm
that would better accommodate the interests of Aboriginal stakeholders. Conse-

quently, Aboriginal peoples' mineral resource claims are likely to remain unresolved.
Conclusion. We suggest how a policy paradigm that both improves Aboriginal-stat

relations and reduces uncertainty in the mining sector offers a promising politi
cal foundation for participatory governance and cooperative engagement between

stakeholders.

* Direct correspondence to J. Andrew Grant, Department of Political Studies, Queens Uni-

versity, 68 University Avenue, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada (andrew.erant@queensu.ca).

The research on which this article is based was funded by an Early Researcher Award from the
Government of Ontario's Ministry of Research and Innovation received by J. Andrew Grant.
We thank Peter Clancy and Sari Graben for their helpful comments on an earlier version o

this article, which was presented at the 83rd Annual Meeting of the Canadian Political Science Association (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) in May 201 1. The authors also thank Dianne
Balraj, Jeremy Davison, Anatoly Levshin, Allan Malcolmson, and Warren Whiteknight fo

their research assistance. The journal editors and two anonymous reviewers provided valuable
guidance and suggestions that improved this article. The views presented in the article belong
to the authors ana do not represent those of the above-mentioned institutions or individuals.

SOCIAL SCIENCE QUARTERLY, Volume 95, Number 4, December 2014
© 2014 by the Southwestern Social Science Association
DOI: 10.1 1 1 l/ssqu.121 15

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 97 9
Prior to the 1960s, very few political scientists expended their scholarly en-

ergies to understanding the relationship between "Aboriginal"1 peoples and
the Canadian state (Cairns, 2000:23). Moreover, even when Aboriginal peoples were occasionally included in such analyses, they were rarely treated as
political actors with independent interests. In many ways, the Canadian Aboriginal politics literature was in its infancy. Yet the state of this literature has
dramatically improved in recent years. Even though a critical mass of political
scientists pursuing research in this subfield has yet to emerge, the existing

literature has certainly demonstrated the various ways in which Aboriginal
peoples are significant actors in Canadian and international politics. Scholars

in this field have tended to concentrate on a select number of topics (e.g.,
Aboriginal rights and self-government), leaving many significant aspects of
the relationship between Aboriginal peoples, non-Aboriginal Canadians, and
the state unexamined. Canadian natural resource policy is one such area of
politics.2 This is indeed surprising given the multiplicity of ways in which
federal and provincial policies on natural resources impact Aboriginal peoples.
These policies are of particular significance to Aboriginal peoples as many nat-

ural resources - particularly mineral resources - are located in or near Aboriginal communities.3 Furthermore, the exploitation of these resources can
be a source of economic development. Canada's mineral production topped
C$50.3 billion in 2011. A similar magnitude of economic activity is generated each year by mineral sector work, such as processing, transportation,
and services. Along the same lines, natural resource policies are important
to the Canadian state because resource extraction has a significant impact
on governments finances, settlement patterns, and other vital policy areas
(e.g., international trade, health and safety, and the environment).4 However,
mineral extraction can also cause serious social, environmental, and cultural
degradation. Given the Janus-faced aspects of such activity, policies relating
to natural resources have been a consistent source of conflict in Canada pre-

cisely because of the important Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal interests at

stake.

This article addresses the aforementioned lacuna in the literature by examining the extent to which changes to the Canadian Constitution in 1982
and Ontario's Mining Act in 2009 enabled Aboriginal communities to become equal partners in participatory governance arrangements in mineral
resource sectors. Politicians have sought to influence the subsequent discourse
^though this article employs the term "Aboriginal," we are cognizant of the diversity among
and within First Nations, Métis, and Inuit groups. Hence, our use of the term Aboriginal reflects

its usage in Canadian legal and legislative documents.

Notable exceptions include Abele (1997), Hessing, Howlett, and Summerville (2005),
Gordon (2006), McAllister (2007), and Slowey (2008).

3 For example, 36 percent of Aboriginal communities are situated less than 50 kilometers
from one of tne primary mines developed in Canada (Hipwell et al., 2002:4).
Natural resources are especially important sources of revenue for the provinces (Cairns,
1992). Our discussion of how mining- related activities are governed in Canada draws upon
Panagos and Grant (2013).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

980 Social Science Quarterly

through assertions of "empowerment" an
riginal communities in mining sectors, yet

in practice. What accounts for the lack of
itable form of participatory governance t

ples' mineral resource claims? Drawing upon

secondary sources5 obtained through fiel
Canada in 2010 - which involved extensiv
stakeholders from all segments of the pro
the article identifies the primary explanat
mining policy paradigm, while under sign
displaced by a new policy paradigm. As s
resource claims are likely to remain unres

future.

To demonstrate this claim, the article proceeds in five parts. Given our
interest in depicting how a policy paradigm can influence institutions, which
in turn structures political outcomes, the article begins with a review of the
literature on institutionalism. Next, the article provides a historical institu-

tional analysis of Canadian mineral resource policy with an emphasis on its
impact on Aboriginal peoples. In the third part of the article, we illustrate
how Aboriginal communities, the mining industry, and Canadian governments have responded to the exogenous changes that comprise the post- 1982
constitutional landscape. We then reflect on the implications of stakeholder

responses to Ontario's Mining Amendment Act for the potential emergence
of a new mining policy paradigm in the province. Finally, we assess the policy paradigm s potential for improving the state of Aboriginal-state relations

in Canada's mining sector. Through the use of a historical institutionalist
approach, the article ultimately contributes to ongoing theoretical debates
surrounding the emergence, stability, and shifting nature of policy paradigms.

While our analysis reveals that the Canadian mining paradigm has yet to be
radically altered, our conclusions nonetheless illustrate the significant ways in
which institutions can be affected by exogenous and endogenous pressures in this case via constitutional and legislative changes that serve to challenge
existing policy paradigms.

5The primary sources consist of relevant provincial and federal legislation as well as semistruc-

tured, in-person interviews that were conducted in 2010. The 30 interviewees who participated
in the study were based in different regions of Ontario and represented a wide range of key
stakeholder groups in the province s natural resources sector, including representatives from
First Nations ana Métis communities and associations, local community representatives, nongovernmental organizations, mining companies, mining associations, mining support sectors
(e.g., prospectors), and government officials. Portions of these interviews, some of which appear in this article, provide critical insights into the enduring nature of Canada s mining policy
paradigm and the state of relations between those actors that are directly involved in the mineral resources sector. The insights provided by the interviews supplement our assessment of
secondary sources (such as books, reports, and academic and media articles) and inform our
institutional analysis of the impact of exogenous and especially endogenous processes on policy
paradigms.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 981
Institutionalism and Policy Paradigms
At the most basic level, an institution can be defined as a set of formal and informal rules that structures human behavior.6 Within this definition, "human

behavior" should be understood in relatively broad terms as encompassing
peoples actions, interests, and beliefs. Moreover, institutions have important

ideational and material components (Thelen, 1999). As a result, institutions
are products of particular geographies, histories, and cultures. Over the past

several decades, political scientists have highlighted the importance of institutions, referring to them as "enduring features of political and social life"

(Mahoney and Thelen, 2010:4) and "fundamental features of politics" (March
and Olsen, 1989:16). For a growing number of scholars institutions are not
"simple mirrors of social forces," but rather possess their own causal power
(March and Olsen, 1989:18)7 For those who hold this view, institutional
analyses are essential tools for understanding political outcomes.
An institutional analysis generally focuses on the following questions. First,
it examines the nature and scope of the impact of institutions on political outcomes. That is, it seeks to understand how institutions shape the behavior of

political actors, policy outcomes, and policy-making environments. Second,
echoing Hall and Taylor (1996:937), an institutional analysis identifies the
mechanisms of institutional emergence, stability, and change. Even though
many scholars agree that institutions are important, they disagree about the
proper way in which to go about conducting institutional analyses. The result
is that the literature on institutionalism is characterized by three different - but
not unrelated - approaches that are referred to in the literature as sociological

institutionalism, rational choice institutionalism, and historical institution-

alism (Immergut, 1998; Hall and Taylor, 1996; Thelen, 1999). 8 Given the
scope of our review of Canadian mineral policies, historical institutionalism
is the most appropriate approach for our analyses.

In order to address the first constitutive question of an institutional
analysis - that is, the nature of institutional impacts on political outcomes -

we use an important concept: the "policy paradigm." While variations exist,
we rely on Peter Halls ideational understanding of a policy paradigm. According to Hall (1992:91), decisionmakers in complex fields of policy making
are often guided by an overarching set of ideas that frame their perceptions

of policy problems, goals, and solutions. Hall avers that "ideas about each
of these matters" "interlock to form a relatively coherent whole that might
6According to Hall and Taylor (1996:938), the term "institution" can apply to a wide
variety of things, ranging from national constitutions to bureaucratic rules regulating very
specific activities such as labor relations and banking.
7Typically, scholars employing an institutional analysis do not rely solely on the causal forces
of institutions to explain political outcomes; instead, as Hall and Taylor (1996:942) explain,
institutional analyses "seek to locate institutions in a causal chain that accommodates a role for
other factors, notably socioeconomic development and the diffusion of ideas."
For a detailed comparison of these approaches, see Immergut (1998) and Hall and Taylor

(1996).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

982 Social Science Quarterly

be described as a policy paradigm" (Hall, 1

paradigm is a momentary, identifiable, stati
from the intersection of ideas, perceptions,
and subject to change as such ideational vari
point of intersection.
In what follows, we outline how two princ
cant government discretion" - have, for over
Canadian mining policies. In turn, we emplo
which helps illuminate the nuances of miner
The Canadian mining policy paradigm allows
tutional emergence, stability, and change be

are shaped by exogenous factors and resp
cording to Mahoney and Thelen (2010), ana

causal mechanisms of institutional persisten
exogenous pressures for change, and simulta

of their endogenous counterparts. Mahon

that the uneven emphasis is not unique to h

All three varieties of institutionalism . . . p

institutions over times as well as compe

exogenous shocks or shifts prompt institu
provide is a general model of change, partic
both exogenous and endogenous sources of

Mindful of Mahoney and Thelens insigh
impact of both types of pressure on the C

but place due emphasis on endogenous factor
endogenous pressures on the paradigm, we e
inal communities, industry, and governmen
behavior during this same period. This analys
actors reactions to the changed constitution
cant stresses for the existing policy paradigm
the Canadian mining policy paradigm constit
sure that excludes consideration of the inter
reducing participatory governance to little m

Canadian Mining Policy Paradigm

In contrast to the United States, private lan
extend automatically to ownership of subsurf
(i.e., federal and provincial governments) "ow
and other natural resources in Canada, which

parties - a common practice in much of

instances where both surface rights and subs
owned, miners can obtain the latter - usuall

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 983
Crown by establishing claims (through a process known as "staking") and by
performing various mining-related activities outlined in statute. As a result,
in cases where the Crown retained subsurface rights, it could sell these rights
to third parties such as mineral-exploration firms and mining companies. In

turn, the owner of the surface rights would be compelled to provide access
to third parties for purposes of exploration and - if perceived to be profitable
by the subsurface rights-holder - subsequent mineral extraction. Under such
circumstances, mineral development can proceed despite the objections of the

owners or occupiers of the land (Chambers and Winfield, 2000: 18-20). 9
However, rather than a purely federal government enterprise, most mining-

related activities fall under the jurisdictional authority of the 10 provincial
governments, as each province has its own set of laws and policies dealing
with mining.10 Despite the multiplicity of mining statutes and regulations
across Canada's provinces, numerous commonalities exist in terms of the
approach to governing the sector. Moreover, all provincial mining policies
are underpinned by two overarching principles - free entry and significant
government discretion - which we describe in this section of the article. Given
this high degree of policy convergence across Canadas provincial mining
sectors, we can employ the concept of a "Canadian mining policy paradigm"
as a useful analytical tool.
The Canadian mining policy paradigm is based on two main tenets (or
principles): free entry and significant government discretion. The principle of
free entry is mentioned in Canadian mining legislation as early as the mid- 19th

century. It has been interpreted as providing a guarantee to those engaged in
mining-related activities important rights in terms of access to Crown lands,
engaging in exploration and claim staking, and ownership of discovered min-

erals (Blue, 1984:5-7; Campbell, 2004:13-15). Free entry means that miners
do not have to obtain permission before accessing public lands and engaging
in certain mining-related activities unless access is expressly prohibited (either by government statute or regulation).11 In contrast, individuals wishing
to engage in other land-use activities (e.g., logging or hunting or tourism)
generally have to obtain permission from the Crown before lawful access and
land-use activities can occur. Significant government discretion, on the other
hand, vests government officials with explicit authority in accordance with
9 In recent years, such cases have given rise to heated debates, complaints, and protests
in Ontario over the problematic nature of the province's mining legislation (e.g., surface
landowner objections to third-party prospecting and mineral exploration on private lands),
drawing national and international media attention (see Austen, 2008; Lawrence, 2008).
The constitutional source of the provinces legislative authority over mineral resources can

be found in Sections 109 and 92 of the Constitution Act, 1867 and the Natural Resources
Transfer Agreements of 1930, which obtained constitutional force by the Constitution Act,
1930 (Blue, 1984:5-6). In Canada's three territories, the federal government has devolved
a significant amount of its responsibilities concerning mineral resources to the territorial
governments (Campbell, 2004:15).
Legislation pertaining to parks in Canada generally includes this type of express prohibition. The result is that miners would not be permitted to engage in claims staking or mineral
exploration in provincial parks.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

984 Social Science Quarterly

mining statutes to intervene in the mineral r

the public interest. This principle gives gove
decision-making power over a full range of

ration phase to closure and rehabilitation
short, these principles work to reconcile the

these two important stakeholders. We sugges
paradigm in this policy-making area has cre
certainty12 in the mineral sector by clearly
rights. Mineral industry advocates view lega
creating a favorable climate for investment,
for this sector since mining requires a great
capital-intensive activity overall.

Though an institutional analysis of politi
acknowledge that institutions do not exi

product of history and context. Similarly, t
within a specific context, one that supports r

and contradictory principles. As a governanc

mining above all other uses and claims to

"confirmed the right of free entry on all C
that Ontario should offer high security of te

over other rights [including Aboriginal cl
the mining industry" (Pardy and Stoehr, 2
has helped to facilitate the development o

side) and economic (industry side) culture ov

mining as the highest priority and best use
the "government side," a representative of a
organization disclosed that "for us there was
out of the 1800s that really brings away the
not only was there this legal framework tha
was a culture."13 On the "industry side," t
"there's a culture that these folks operate in

mining is the best and highest use of the
to Ontario, you know we're going to give
giving us subsidies, yes you should be mak
yes ... all the land should be available for

speak of the mining policy paradigm as havi
free entry - and the administrative and econ
trump the principle of significant governm

12 By "legal certainty" we mean laws and policies tha
who can do what, where and when, as well as who ow

0 Authors in-person interview with an environmen
resentative, Toronto, Ontario, July 15, 2010. In accor
guidelines, we have provided only a general descripto
the identity of these individuals.
Authors' in-person interview with an environment
resentative, Toronto, Ontario, July 15, 2010.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 985
Before proceeding to our discussion of the impact of the mining policy
paradigm on Aboriginal peoples, a few reflections are required on what is
meant by certainty in the mineral resources sector. Here, the definition of
uncertainty might be thought of as changing over time. In pre- 1982 terms,

certainty can be understood as a set of predictable expectations held by industry regarding outcomes, specifically the primacy of free entry and the
mining rights that extend from it. Since mining was the privileged use of
the land in Ontario and free entry and discretion were part of the dominant
mining policy paradigm, mining companies operated under conditions of legal certainty. However, legal challenges have introduced uncertainty through

the legal (re) introduction of recognized claimants (Aboriginal communities
whose land was stolen) and new, but as of yet not legislatively defined, duties

to consult. As predictability and stability are important for commercial investment, establishing such conditions is one important evaluative criterion.15
More importantly, the reconciliation of uncertainties within the mining policy paradigm also requires evaluation as to how well the amendments and the
adjusted paradigm account for and accommodate Aboriginal rights and claims
and consultative structures between Aboriginal communities and industry, as
well as intergovernmental relations between Aboriginal communities and the

province of Ontario. As such, "certainty" is perhaps best understood in the
new legal climate as certainty of process rather than outcome.

Impacts on Aboriginal Peoples
The legal framework that enabled the development of the mining policy
paradigm was the result of approximately two centuries of legislation dating back to the 1763 Royal Proclamation, which systematically eliminated
First Nations control of and claims to the land. The Royal Proclamation
subsumed First Nations' jurisdiction under British sovereignty, creating a paternalistic regime in which First Nations' rights and entitlements only existed

at the pleasure of the colonial regime (Thobani, 2007:47). The creation of
the reservation system and the category of "Indian-ness" culminated in the
1876 Indian Act. This Act contributed to a legal framework composed of
various policies and pieces of legislation that facilitated the removal of First
Nations from their lands and their concentration in specific reservations, effectively transferring control of the land to the colonial regime (Napoleon,
2001; Thobani, 2007:47-55). The Indian Act was further amended to create
legal barriers to pursuing land claims cases in the courts by banning the solicitation of funds and use of band funds for land claims cases (Lawrence, 2004:

25-44). 16
15 This is particularly the case in the mineral resource sector where years and millions of
dollars of investment are required before a mining site begins operation.
A detailed history of First Nations experiences in the court system in the early 20th century

can be found in Backhouse (1999:18-131).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

986 Social Science Quarterly

From 1888 to 1973, the leading legal pre

rights as usufructs, which viewed the Abori
lowing way: "the tenure of the Indians was

dependent upon the good will of the Sov
Court of Canada (SCC) handed down wha

Calder decision. This split decision raised the
nations did in fact have rights to certain lan
exist)18 and was the impetus behind the creat

cess (Kulchyski, 1994:62). The impact of th

and uneven. It did not lead to the successful

though some land claims were in the "pipe

settled before the patriation of the Canadian
And, even to this day, only a handful of tre
Aboriginal nations and the Crown (and this

in relation to the number of outstanding
challenged the vision of Aboriginal rights
it did not offer an alternative unambiguous
and scope of Aboriginal rights. In short, the
state used the law to systematically elimin
legal recourse.
The stability of the aforementioned free-e
as part of the production of a Canadian narr
and empty land. This narrative has been rom
politicians:
From the paintings of the Group of Seven to the novels of Margaret Atwood,

and to the iconic image of Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau in a buckskin
jacket canoeing on a lake . . . this relationship of real Canadians to the
land, emptied of Aboriginal peoples except as symbolized relics, features
prominently in the artistic and mythic representations of their nationality.

(Thobani, 2007:60)

To the extent that Aboriginal populations were even acknowledged, such
portrayals were productions of a Western-centric colonizing lens. As Thobani

(2007:60) notes: "As part of nature, of the landscape, the question of [real
Canadians'] sovereign right to proprietorship over the land became quite
inconceivable in such narratives." This mythologizing of the land erases the
colonial violence upon which it is premised. Moreover, this image of Canada as
a vast and empty land opens the possibility to a nation of drawers of water and
hewers of wood to draw on a similar narrative to exploit its natural resource
wealth.

17 St. Catherine's (1888).
18 Six of the seven judges advanced that Aboriginal title existed; though three put forward

that government action had extinguished the title of the Aboriginal nation involved in the
lawsuit (Miller, 2004:154).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 987
Prior to 1982, most Canadian federal and provincial governments denied
the existence of Aboriginal rights (including rights to land and natural resources). Aboriginal rights were cast as usufructs, and Canada did not offer
Aboriginal peoples an effective legal recourse for securing the enforcement
of treaties or for protecting their rights.19 Consequently, Aboriginal peoples
had to rely on lobbying governments and politicians, moral persuasion, civil

disobedience, and violent protests in order to press their claims. For many
decades, these options produced limited results. Importantly, this legal envi-

ronment contributed to a mining policy paradigm that excluded Aboriginal

interests in the Canadian mineral sector.

In 1982, an Aboriginal rights provision, Section 35, was included in
Canadas Constitution Act. Although Aboriginal rights and treaties had finally gained constitutional status, Section 35 was deliberately vague in order

to mollify both supporters and critics of this legislation during constitutional negotiations in the early 1980s. Subsequent attempts at fleshing out
the parameters of Section 35 failed, which meant that the SCC was asked
to adjudicate matters relating to Aboriginal rights and treaties. Over the next

two decades, the SCC began to clarify a number of important issues relating to the nature and scope of Aboriginal rights and Aboriginal title. In
the cases of Sparrow (1990) and van der Peet (1996), the SCC found that a
Section 35 (activity-focused) right is a "precontact" and integral Aboriginal
custom, practice, or tradition that has not been extinguished by the Crown.
At the same time, the SCC outlined a multistep process for identifying spe-

cific Aboriginal rights ( van der Peet , 1996:paras.45-46; para.60) and what
constitutes their prima facie infringement {Sparrow, 1990:39). In order to
successfully pursue a Section 35 claim, Aboriginal claimants must identify
a right and explain how it has been infringed. The SCC also went on to
outline a two-step process for justifying the infringement of an Aboriginal
right ( Sparrow , 1990:40-46), which allows the Crown to behave in ways that

contradict an existing Aboriginal right. In the case of Delgamuukw (1997),
the SCC outlined the nature of Aboriginal title; that is, Section 35 rights
that are land focused. Specifically, the SCC advanced that Aboriginal title is
a right to exclusive occupation and use of traditional territories held collectively by Aboriginal nations that is inalienable (except to the Crown). The
SCC's characterization of Aboriginal title makes it unique and the justices
are quite correct in calling this proprietary title sui generis (. Delgamuukw ,

1997:para.l 1 1).
In another set of cases - Haida (2004), Taku River (2004), Mikisew Cree
(2005), and Rio Tinto (2010) - the SCC found that under certain circumstances the Crown (i.e., the government) had a constitutional duty to consult

19In the period from 1973 to 1982, several Aboriginal rights claims did result in the

beginning or a body of jurisprudence that would be further advanced after the introduction
of Section 35. Culhane (1998:72-89) provides an illustrative example of this jurisprudence in
the form of a review of Canadian white papers and legal tests from the 1970s.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

988 Social Science Quarterly

and accommodate Aboriginal peoples. Th

stitutional duty is triggered when either an

(or as yet unproven) Aboriginal right may
or third-party activities. In such cases, th
consultations with the Aboriginal rights-

ity of the adverse effect, the Crown is subs
number of activities ranging from merely p

holder with information to securing a se

(Haida, 2004: paras.43-44). Hence, the S

has placed the mineral policy-making par
pressure. Although the SCC has not spelle
terests can be accommodated, it has insis
(Tzimas, 2005). On balance, given the dom
mining policy paradigm, it is still unclear
reconciled with the legal framework that

decades.

As the above discussion reveals, the Can
has utterly failed to address Aboriginal p
argues that although "restrictions on Abo
resources are less blatant" now compared
Canadian population is "still operating in
Other scholars have made similar observ
Aboriginal peoples' exclusion from natura
et al. (2002:4) note, "[s] ince the industri
Aboriginal people have had little say in d
ing near or on their ancestral lands, and
and received none - or only negligible - b
why mining persists as a contentious issue

provide the context for Aboriginal protests,

lence, and other disputes over proposed an

Canada.

Two recent high-profile cases in Ontario highlight the enduring discontent

concerning Aboriginal communities with respect to the Canadian mining
policy paradigm. In 2006, a simmering dispute erupted into a confrontation
between the Kitchenuhmaykoosib Inninuwug (KI) First Nation, located approximately 600 kilometers north of Thunder Bay, Ontario, and Platinex, a
mineral exploration firm. In response to the unwanted drilling on their traditional lands, KI interrupted Platinex 's drilling program and forced the company's workers to leave the area (Hiyate, 2006). As a result of this confrontation, a series of lawsuits were launched from each side, as Platinex attempted

to sue KI for damages of C$10 billion (later reduced to C$10 million), while
KI launched a countersuit of C$10 million against the company. The acrimo-

nious situation between the company and KI continued to escalate over the
next two years, resulting in the sentencing of six leaders of the KI community,
on March 17, 2008, to six months in prison (later reduced to approximately 10

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 989
weeks by the Ontario Court of Appeal) for contempt of court after the members violated a court injunction requiring them to allow the drilling program
to continue. In May 2008, Platinex also filed a lawsuit against the government
of Ontario for C$70 million for damages and related costs.20 Meanwhile, the
second incident occurred when members of the Ardoch Algonquin and Shabot

Obaadjiwan First Nations in eastern Ontario blocked Frontenac Ventures, a
junior mining company, from accessing a prospective uranium site on what
they claimed to be traditional Ardoch lands. The company then filed a C$77
million lawsuit against the First Nations groups (which, in response, launched

a C$10 million lawsuit against Frontenac Ventures and a C$1 billion lawsuit
against the government of Ontario). The dispute also resulted in the sentencing
and fining of community leaders, including Queen's University professor Bob

Lovelace in February 2008. Although an Ontario Court of Appeal judge later
reduced Bob Lovelaces sentence to time served (3.5 months) and quashed
the C$25,000 fine, and the government of Ontario was able to negotiate
a compromise agreement21 in November 2008 that would see the lawsuits
dropped, the public backlash stemming from these incidents contributed to
the growing pressure on the government to overhaul the province 's Mining

Act.

One possibility is that situations similar to the ones mentioned above will
result in future litigation and prompt the SCC to provide further clarity regard-

ing the constitutional right of Aboriginal communities to consent to mineral

development on their lands. The changes to the Canadian Constitution in
1982 included a bill of rights (Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
referred to as the Charter), which under the auspices of the SCC, has had a
significant impact on Canadian institutions, federal-provincial relations, and

areas of social and public policy (Hiebert, 2002, 2010; Clarke, 2006; Smith,
1999). Since 1982, the SCC has signaled its willingness to nullify or amend
legislation it deems inconsistent with Charter principles. Some scholars argue
that an active SCC coupled with parliamentary response represents a form of

ongoing Charter "dialogue" between the two institutions (Hogg and Bushell,
1997; Hennigar, 2004; Hogg, Thornton, and Wright, 2007). For the legislative branch, this in turn has led to the development of a "Charter-proofing"
process within the Department of Justice that evaluates and changes proposed
legislation so as to avoid SCC nullification (Hiebert, 2002; Kelly, 2005). As
Hiebert (2002:9) argues, court decisions have "influenced bureaucratic culture to accept Charter-proofing." What is interesting in this case is that the

20 In December 2009, Platinex agreed to a proposal from the government of Ontario whereby
the company would drop its lawsuits as well as relinquish its mining claims and leases to the
property in exchange for a government payment of C$5 million. The agreement also reimbursed
Platinex for expenses incurred during the mediation process and promised to pay the firm a
2.5 percent royalty on smelting in the event that mining occurs on the property in the next 25
years (Kirwin, 2009).
Green (2008) and Ministry of Aboriginal Affairs (2008) outline the details of the agreement
as well as some of the responses by stakeholders.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

990 Social Science Quarterly

SCC-established duty to consult is contained
does not appear to alter the mining policy p

Political Actors' Responses to the Changed

Aboriginal Peoples

Before 1982, Aboriginal peoples had rarely
of pursuing their interests.2 Given the natu
it is clearly understandable why the courts

for Aboriginal peoples. However, after 19
the courts with increasing frequency. La
observe that between 1982 and 2000 there
First Nations and the Crown not to tax th

judiciary by excessive litigation of disputes,

negotiated settlements." The constitutiona
treaties gave Aboriginal peoples the support

a result, government laws and policies tha
can now be struck down by the courts, and

that governments, as well as third parties, c
now incentives for Aboriginal peoples to app
above-noted changes to the constitutional lan
come to embrace the new opportunities affor
the ability to litigate a rights claim in court
governments and industry to ignore Aborig
resources. This new cost, in turn, represents
mineral policy-making paradigm.

Mining Industry

Some members of the mining industry h

legal realities by negotiating directly with A
pact and Benefit Agreements (IBAs), which a

hence exclude the Crown. IBAs commonly

especially regarding provisions for various p

employment positions allocated to the Ab
shaw, and Rutherford, 2007:28). Although

struck (Fidler, 2010:236), reaching a deal rem

22There are some important pre- 1982 cases that inv

(1973). This case led to the creation of the land-c
cases brought before the courts in the three decades
of cases heard between 1867 and 1982.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 991
communities have mixed attitudes toward mineral development. Furthermore,
as some scholars have noted, there are numerous concerns surrounding IBAs,
such as their confidential nature, the distribution of IBA benefits within the
community, and the possibility that these agreements serve as instruments for

reinforcing domination and control over Aboriginal communities (Fidler and

Hitch, 2007; Caine and Krogman, 2010). Consequently, the prospects for
IBAs to serve as inclusive instruments that accommodate Aboriginal interests
are limited.

We adduce that IBAs place endogenous pressure on the mineral policymaking paradigm. In many respects, IBAs undermine both the principles of
"free entry" and "government discretion." By providing alternative avenues
for obtaining legal rights to engage in mining-related activities, IBAs "bypass"
the free-entry system. Given the opaque nature of these agreements, there is
also less certainty, as both Aboriginal communities and industry do not yet
have a sense what the "new normal" is. Moreover, the secretive nature of IBAs
makes it increasingly difficult for the Crown to protect the public interest, as
government is not privy to the details of IBAs. Hence, while these agreements
do provide Aboriginals and industry stakeholders with a means through which

to meet the SCC s requirements to accommodate Aboriginal interests, they
also reduce the Crown s capacity to ensure "government discretion" while
undermining the practice of free entry that has been a central feature of the
mining policy paradigm.

Governments

Although many in the mining industry have turned toward IBAs as a means
of recognizing Aboriginal interests when mineral resources are at stake, there is
also evidence to suggest that some members of the mining industry have also
pushed for reforms in mining laws so as to improve the legislation governing

mining. This is indeed the case in Ontario where industry leaders demonstrated significant support for overhauling the provincial Mining Act.23 Owing
to widespread concerns and complaints about the province s antiquated min-

ing legislation, Premier Dalton McGuinty's government passed Bill 173, the
Mining Amendment Act, in 2009. According to the government of Ontario
(2009): "The Bill makes numerous amendments to the Mining Act relating to prospecting land, staking mining claims, disputing claims, assessment
work, surface rights owners, exploration work, diamond mine royalties and

consultation with Aboriginal communities." The Act includes several clauses
that explicitly mention Aboriginal peoples. Crucially, Aboriginal and treaty

23This sentiment was voiced by several interviewees from mining companies, mining associations, and mining support sectors during in-person interviews conducted in Sudbury, North
Bay, and Toronto, Ontario, in 2010.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

992 Social Science Quarterly

rights are recognized in the statute - the fir
in Canada to do so. Section 2 of the Act read

The purpose of this Act is to encourage pro
for the development of mineral resources,
recognition and affirmation of existing Abor

35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, includ

minimize the impact of these activities on
environment. (Mining Amendment Act, G

This section of the Act seeks to modify

that it is consistent with Aboriginal and tre
goods. To that end, the Act creates a dispute
industry conflicts; it provides for the remov
sites from mineral development; and it requ
for certain exploration and mining activities
remaining sections of this article we examine
Bill 173 in the context of free entry, Aborigi
In so doing, this discussion serves to illumin
the new legislation while revealing the endu
The Ontario case suggests that the governm
1982 legal environment by recognizing Ab

duties to Aboriginals in its provincial min

government s decision to revise the provinc
indicative of endogenous processes at work i
trenched mining policy paradigm. And yet, w
tally attempted to include Aboriginal interes

sector, the two underlying principles of t

entry and significant government discretion
Rather, free entry and discretion remain em

Act. Free entry is even mentioned in the
and treaty rights. Thus, it would appear t
essentially trying to stretch the mining p
rights and the duty to consult and accom
we examine this issue by considering stak
Amendment Act. This discussion ultimate
for the emergence of a new mining polic
some conclusions about the mining policy pa

Aboriginal-state relations in the mining secto

24 The precise details of these measures are not spe
outlined during the regulatory phase of the legislatio
of the Act s regulations are concretized.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 993
Ontario's Mining Amendment Act: Prospects for the Emergence of a New
Mining Policy Paradigm

Although the Mining Amendment Act has been heralded by numerous
stakeholders in Ontario's mining sector as a radical improvement from the
previous legislation, concerns remain over a number of elements in the Act.
First and foremost, it is important to remember that the Mining Act remains

a work in progress. Although some regulations were introduced on January
1 , 2011, many of the new regulations and policies related to the Act will be
phased in over the next several years. Thus, it is fair to say that with respect
to the Act, the "devil is in the details." However, what is certain at this stage
is that the most contentious issue with respect to the revised Act is connected
to the principles of free entry and significant government discretion. More
specifically, there is a great deal of concern about the government s decision to
include these principles in the amended legislation.

In their review of the changes to the Mining Act, MiningWatch Canada
(MWC), a prominent environmental nongovernmental organization, expresses explicit concern over the presence of Crown discretion in the new
Act. In essence, MWC argues that the high degree of ministerial discretion
is an overarching aspect of Bill 173 that is highly problematic. According to

MWC (2009:3):

An unaccep tably high degree of Ministerial discretion is found in most aspects
of the proposed amendments. From the very beginning of the mining process

the Minister can give consent to staking in areas that would otherwise be
off limits, and even if staked without Ministerial consent the prospector
may then seek consent retroactively (Section 29). This type of discretionary
approval re-appears again and again weakening the amendments and raising
concerns about transparency and the potential politicization of the planning
and decision making process.

While this is but one example of the concern over discretion in the new
Act, it nevertheless points to the tension in Ontario's contribution to a new

mining policy paradigm. Ministerial discretion could prove to challenge or
contradict Aboriginal rights to be accommodated and meaningfully consulted,
if government is able to simply override Aboriginal interests and or decisionmaking processes. This aspect of the new Act could prove to be destabilizing
to the new mining policy paradigm.
Perhaps the most serious concern in Bill 173 (2009) relates to the first dominant principle in the mining policy paradigm: free entry. As many stakeholders
indicated in our interviews, the notion of "free, prior, and informed consent"
is conspicuously absent in the new Mining Act. This is a particularly alarming
issue for many First Nations, who have adamantly argued that First Nations
must have free, prior, and informed consent before any activity can take place
in their traditional territories. This is a point echoed by Nishnawbe Aski Nation (NAN) Grand Chief Stan Beardy, who states: "Free, prior and informed

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

994 Social Science Quarterly

consent means that no prospecting, staking,

can proceed without a written agreement

That is the standard expressed in Article 32
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. That is
meet" (NAN, 2009). Fundamentally, this m

want the option of saying "no" to a prosp

Act attempts to incorporate Aboriginal cons

is much concern over the vagueness surro
as many First Nations communities have a

institutionalize "free, prior, and informed c
As noted by MWC (2010), "if consultation

nities must have the right to say no to proje

interest. There is nothing in the new act th
First Nations' right to say no,'" largely owing

requirements for consultation will be determ
the regulations under the Act. Thus, while t
participatory governance in the mining sect
and the duty to consult, the mining policy p
this objective if free entry continues to trum
consultation.

As indicated earlier, one of the evaluative c
paradigm is its ability to accommodate Abor
tional control, shifting the focus more to cer
outcome. Coupled with this change, a move t

in the mineral resources sector in which A

right to be consulted and to exert consent is

legislation includes principles of the origi
this direction and the governments positi
Although the government has intimated

will be developed during the forthcoming re
liminary insights on the government s comm

extension the prospects for generating a n

be derived from a review of its legislative act

While extensive consultation was underta

the specific First Nations consultation com
tial government consultation plan, but rat
lobbying by First Nations groups. As one

government was "initially looking at a very
going to have these consultations sessions wi

identified half a dozen sites . . . [for cons

tably, the proposed consultation process trea
stakeholder group that could be consulted as
site-specific consultations to be undertaken

25Authors' in-person interview with a First Nations

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 995
Nations representatives argued that they needed more of a role in the process

to make it a joint undertaking that satisfied constitutional obligations and
moved toward reconciliation and meaningful engagement with First Nations

communities and their concerns. In response, a revised consultation process
was eventually established with a First-Nations-specific process that satisfied
some of the initial concerns voiced by First Nations representatives. In commenting on the "final product" of the consultation process - the Act itself - a
representative with an influential First Nations organization noted, "I think
what emerged was far superior to what was going to come out of the process

that the government had designed and was simply going through the motions."26 Though the government in the end established a more participatory
and accommodating process, it was the result of extensive lobbying and not

the initial process considered acceptable by the government. As such, this
illustrates that the adoption of the new mining policy paradigm is a work in
progress for the government of Ontario.

Conclusions

We have argued that despite an impressive expansion of the scholarship
on Canadian Aboriginal politics in recent years, the topic of natural resource

policy remains undertheorized. This article has sought to address this gap
by conducting a historical institutionalist examination of the relationship
between the state and Aboriginal groups in the mining sector. Following
from the historical institutionalist perspective, this article suggests that while

institutions structure and organize agential practices, the latter shape and
reconfigure existing institutional frameworks. This approach has been applied
to free entry and discretion in the mining sector as part of our analysis of major
changes in Canada s constitutional landscape and recent legislative changes to

Ontario's natural resource sector. Despite the recent efforts on the part of
the government of Ontario to "engage" institutional actors in the revision of
the province s Mining Act, our research reveals the entrenched nature of the
Canadian mining paradigm that fundamentally undermines the interests, most
notably, of Aboriginal peoples. In so doing, the article illustrates the rigidity

of certain institutions despite the exogenous and endogenous pressures that

threaten to destabilize these institutions.

As noted, while there has been significant change in mineral resource governance in Canada and Ontario, both legal/constitutional and policy related,
these evolutions, in particular with respect to the development of regulations
in Ontario's Mining Amendment Act, remain a work in progress. While endogenous pressure by Aboriginal communities has led to formal institutional
changes and challenged the long-standing mining policy paradigm, there has
26 Authors' in-person interview with an executive member of a First Nations representative
organization, Ottawa, Ontario, July 13, 2010.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

996 Social Science Quarterly

not as of yet been a significant paradigm sh
of the constitutional changes. This intransig

tence of the mining policy paradigm and
regulation.
The historical institutionalist account we offer in this article illus-

trates the need for cultural - not just legal - change for the mining policy
paradigm and mineral resource governance to evolve to include and embrace
participatory governance. With the maintenance of both pieces of the mining
policy paradigm, free entry and discretion, current changes suggest that legal
accommodation of the SCC rulings represents a series of legal and procedural "hoops" rather than a change in decades-old industry culture. Discretion,
combined with the failed inclusion of provisions for free, prior, and informed
consent, or, put differently, the actual power for Aboriginal communities to say

"no" to mineral resource development, means that Aboriginal rights remain
at the pleasure of the responsible ministry.
This article contributes an explanation of changes and relationships within

and between agents and institutions in Canadian mineral resource governance. This framework opens further opportunities for research, specifically
related to the question of change. Institutions and paradigms are products of
particular contexts, geographies, histories, and discourses. Agents and institutions are mutually constituted, as we suggest, but are so constituted within
and produced by the aforementioned ideational considerations. Similarly, the
post- 1982 legal context has not translated into significant political and cultural

changes regarding the standing of Aboriginal land claims, nor has it erased
the continued legacy of centuries of colonial history. Further examination of
institutional change requires exploration of connection between the creation,
evolution, and persistence of the mining policy paradigm and these ideational
variables, as well as the continued unequal power relations between industry
stakeholders, Aboriginal peoples, and civil society.
As depicted above, uncertainty continues to afflict Aboriginal groups and
industry and civil society stakeholders, despite three decades of jurisprudence

by the SCC and much-heralded revisions to Ontario's mineral resource legislation. Intervening factors, most notably the Canadian government s efforts
over the past five years to marginalize the U.N. Declaration on the Rights of

Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), contribute to this atmosphere of uncertainty.
When announcing its "support for" (rather than signing) the UNDRIP in
2010, the Canadian government emphasized that the agreement is a "nonlegally binding document that does not reflect customary international law
nor change Canadian laws" and that on numerous occasions "Canada placed
on record its concerns with various provisions of the Declaration, including provisions dealing with lands, territories and resources; [and] free, prior

and informed consent when used as a veto."27 In 201 1, Canada (along with
the United States, New Zealand, and Australia) tried to persuade the U.N.
27 Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada (2010).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 997
Commission on Sustainable Developments Working Group on Mining to
have the right to "free, prior, and informed consent" removed from the UN-

DRIP.28 These actions also illustrate the continuing tension between the old
paradigm - at least as it relates to the federal level - and the development of
a new policy paradigm of participatory governance that recognizes Aboriginal
jurisdiction. This has important implications for the prevailing mining policy
paradigm in terms of participatory governance in Ontario, leading to the potential for conflict rather than positive government-stakeholder relations. As
such, the evolution of the mining policy paradigm from certainty of outcome
to certainty of process remains in its early stages, while federal and provincial policies in the interim have appeared contradictory to the policy aims of
meaningful consultation with Aboriginal groups as highlighted in the changes

to the Ontario Mining Act. Ultimately, while government, industry actors,
and Aboriginal groups attempt to resolve this tension in accordance with their
respective interests, only a policy paradigm that improves Aboriginal-state relations in the mining sector and reduces uncertainty in the policy area can offer
a promising political foundation for participatory governance and cooperative
engagement between the three groups.
REFERENCES

Abele, Frances. 1997. "Understanding What Happened Here: The Political Economy of
digenous Peoples." Pp. 118-40 in Wallace Clement, ed., Understanding Canada : Building

the New Canadian Political Economy. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Pre

Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. 2010. "Canada's Statement of Su
port on the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples." Press Re
(November 12). Ottawa: Government of Canada.

Austen, Ian. 2008. "In Parts of Canada, Landowners Battle Prospectors." New York T
September 1.

Backhouse, Constance. 1999. Colour-Coded: A Legal History of Racism in Canada, 1900-1950.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Bartlett, Richard H. 1984. "The Right to Mine and the Extent of Ministerial Discretion." Pp.
19-45 in Richard H. Bartlett, ed., Mining Law in Canada. Saskatoon: Canadian Cataloguing
in Publication Data.

Blue, George. 1984. "Exploration Dispositions, Priority and Registration." Pp. 5-18 in Richard
H. Bartlett, ed Mining Law in Canada. Saskatoon: Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data.

Caine, Ken J., and Naomi Krogman. 2010. "Powerful or Just Plain Power-Full? A Power

Analysis of Impact and Benefit Agreements in Canada's North." Organization and Environment
23( 1 ):76 - 98.

Cairns, Alan C. 2000. Citizens Plus: Aboriginal Peoples and the Canadian State. Vancouver:
University of British Columbia Press.

Cairns, Robert D. 1992. "Natural Resources and Canadian Federalism: Decentralization,
Recurring Conflict, and Resolution." Publius: The Journal of Federalism 22(l):55-70.

28 Union of BC Indian Chiefs (201 1).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

998 Social Science Quarterly

Campbell, Karen. 2004. Undermining Our Future: H

Harms People and the Environment. Vancouver: West

Chambers, Colin, and Mark Winfield. 2000. Mining'
and Policy in Canada. Toronto: Canadian Institute f

Clarke, Jeremy A. 2006. "Beyond the Democratic D
Provincial Arguments and Supreme Court Responses

of Political Science 39(2):293-3l4.

Culhane, Dara. 1998. The Pleasure of the Crown: Anthr
Talonbooks.

Fidler, Courtney. 2010. "Increasing the Sustainabil
nal Engagement and Negotiated Agreements." Envir

12(2):233-44.

Fidler, Courtney, and Michael Hitch. 2007. "Impact
Issue for Environmental and Aboriginal Justice." En

Galbraith, Lindsay, Benjamin Bradshaw, and Mur
Supraregulatory Approach to Environmental Asses
sessment and Project Appraisal 2 5 (2): 27-4 1 .

Gordon, Todd. 2006. "Canada, Empire, and Indige
Studies 2(1) :47-75.

Government of Ontario. 2009. "Bill 173: An Act

Government of Ontario.

Green, Jeff. 2008. "Shabot Obaadjiwan Comes to Ac

Ventures." Frontenac News December 4.

Hall, Peter A. 1992. "The Movement from Keynesianis
and British Economic Policy in the 1970s." Pp. 99-1 13
Frank Longstreth, eds., Structuring Politics: Historica
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hall, Peter A., and Rosemary C. R. Taylor. 1996.

Institutionalisms." Political Studies 44(5):936-57.

Hennigar, Matthew. 2004. "Expanding the 'Dialogue
Responses to Lower Court Charter Decisions." Canad

23.

Hessing, Melody, Michael Howlett, and Tracy Summerville. 2005. Canadian Natural Resource
and Environmental Policy , 2nd ed. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Hiebert, Janet L. 2002. Charter Conflicts: What is Parliament's Role ? Montreal and Kingston:
McGill-Queen s University Press.

Courtney and David E. Smith, eds., Oxford Handbook of Cana
University Press.

Hipwell, William, Katy Mamen, Viviane Weitzner, and Ga

Peoples and Mining in Canada: Consultation, Participation and

North-South Institute.

Hiyate, Alisha. 2006. "'Duty to Consult' at Issue in Platinex-Big Trout Case." Northern Miner

92(4):9-l 1.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Participatory Governance and Aboriginal Peoples 999
Hogg, Peter W., and Allison A. Bushell. 1997. "The Charter Dialogue Between Courts and
Legislatures (or Perhaps the Charter of Rights Isn't Such a Bad Thing After All)." Osgoode Hall

Law Journal 35(1):75-124.

Hogg, Peter W., Allison A. Bushell Thornton, and Wade K. Wright. 2007. "Charter Dialogue
Revisited - or'Much Ado About Metaphors'." Osgoode Hall Law Journal 45(1): 1-65.
Immergut, Ellen M. 1998. "The Theoretical Core of New Institutionalism." Politics & Society

26(1):5- 34.

Kelly, James B. 2005. Governing with the Charter: Legislative and Judicial Activism and Framers'
Intent. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.

Kirwin, Susan. 2009. "Ontario to Pay Platinex $5M in Settlement." Northern Miner 95(44): 1 ,

11.

Kulchyski, Peter. 1994. Unjust Relations: Aboriginal Rights in Canadian Courts. Toronto: Oxford
University Press.

Lawrence, Bonita. 2004. "Real" Indians and Others: Mixed Blood Urban Native Peoples and
Indigenous Nationhood. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.

Lawrence, Daina. 2008. "Calls to Repeal Ontario's Antiquated Mining Act." Financial Times
May 10.
Lawrence, Sonia, and Patrick Macklem. 2000. "From Consultation to Reconciliation: Aboriginal Rights and the Crown's Duty to Consult." Canadian Bar Review 79:252-79.
Mahoney, James, and Kathleen Thelen. 20 1 0. "A Theory of Gradual Institutional Change. " Pp.
1-37 in James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen, eds., Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity,
Agency, and Power. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
March, James G., and Johan P. Olsen. 1989. Rediscovering Institutions: The Organizational Basis
of Politics. New York: Macmillan.
McAllister, Mary Louise. 2007. "Shifting Foundations in a Mature Staples Industry: A Political
Economic History of Canadian Mineral Policy." Canadian Political Science Review 1 (1 ):73- 90.
Miller, J. R. 2004. Lethal Legacy: Current Native Controversies in Canada. Toronto: McClelland
& Stewart.

MiningWatch Canada. 2009. "Mining Watch Canada's Response to Ontario's Bill 173, A Bill
to Amend the Mining Act." Available at (www.miningwatch.ca/updir/Response_to_Ontario
_Bill_173.pdf).

miningwatch.ca/en/ontario-s-new-mining-act-leaves-gapin

Ministry of Aboriginal Affairs. 2008. "Ontario, First Nations

Mineral Exploration in Eastern Ontario." Press Release (No

of Ontario.

NAN. 2009. "NAN Statement on Passing of Mining Act

tober 22). Available at (www.nan.on.ca/upload/documents/
22.pdf).

Napoleon, Val. 2001. "Extinction by Number: Colonialism Made Easy." Canadian Journal of
Law and Society 16(1): 1 1 3-45 .

Notzke, Claudia. 1 994. Aboriginal Peoples and Natural Resources in Canada. North York: Captus
University Publications.

Panagos, Dimitrios, and J. Andrew Grant. 2013. "Constitutional Change, Aboriginal Rights,
and Mining Policy in Canada." Commonwealth & Comparative Politics 5 1 (4):405- 23-

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1 000 Social Science Quarterly

Pardy, Bruce, and Annette Stoehr. 2011. "The Failed
Journal of Environmental Law and Practice 23(1): 1-1 5.

Slowey, Gabrielle. 2008. Navigating Neoliberalism: Self
First Nation. Vancouver: University of British Columbia

Smith, Miriam. 1999. Lesbian and Gay Rights in Canad
Seeking, 1971-1995. Toronto: University of Toronto Pre

Sossin, Lome. 2006. "Discretion and the Culture of Justic
December:356-84.

Thelen, Kathleen. 1999. "Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics." Annual Review
of Political Science 2(l):369-404.
Thobani, Sunera. 2007. Exalted Subjects: Studies in the Making of Race and Nation in Canada.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Tzimas, Ria E. 2005. "Haida Nation and Taku River: A Commentary on Aboriginal Consultation and Reconciliation." Supreme Court Law Review 29:461-84.

Union of BC Indian Chiefs. 2011. "Free, Prior and Informed Consent: May 18, 2011 Joint Statement." Available at (www.ubcic.bc.ca/News_Releases/UBCICNews05191101
.html#axzz lyYffzkhT).

Cases Cited

Calder et al. v. British Columbia (Attorney-General '), [1973] S.C.R. 313.

Delgamuukw v. British Columbia , [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1010.
Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 511,
2004 SCC 73.
Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Heritage), [2005] 3 S.C.R.
388.

R. v. Sparrow , [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075.
R. v. Van der Peet, [199 6] 2 S.C.R. 507, 1996 SCC 28.
Rio Tinto Alean Inc. v. Carrier Sekáni Tribal Council , [2010] 2 S.C.R. SCC
43.

St. Catherine's Milling & Lumber Co. v. The Queen, [1888] 14 App. Cas. 46
(J. C.P.C.).
Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia (Project Assessment Di-

rector ), [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


