---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
To Treaty or Not to Treaty? Aboriginal Peoples and Comprehensive Land Claims
Negotiations in Canada
Author(s): Christopher Alcantara
Source: Publius , Spring, 2008, Vol. 38, No. 2 (Spring, 2008), pp. 343-369
Published by: Oxford University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20184972

To Treaty or Not to Treaty? Aboriginal
Peoples and Comprehensive Land Claims

Negotiations in Canada1
Christopher Alcantara*

Although the federal comprehensive land claims (CLC) process has become an almost hegemonic
paradigm of government-Aboriginal relations in Canada, this article argues that Aboriginal groups

should consider abandoning the CLC process if they have not been able to make significant
progress towards completing treaties. Previously, many Aboriginal groups had no better option

but to negotiate CLC treaties to achieve their goals. Now, however, a number of institutional

developments have given Aboriginal groups a range of other options that are worth pursuing
instead of CLC treaties. These developments are: Two judicial decisions handed down in 2004 and
the emergence of three policy instruments outside of the treaty process: Self-government agree

ments, bilateral agreements, and the First Nations Land Management Act

Introduction
Over the last thirty-five years, the federal comprehensive land claims process (CLC) has

had a powerful effect on Canadian federalism. Since 1973, Aboriginal peoples and the

Crown have completed twenty-two modern treaties. These treaties have allowed
Aboriginal peoples to create new land management and governing regimes in the
Yukon Territory, the Northwest Territories, Nunavut, British Columbia, Quebec, and

Newfoundland and Labrador (Alcantara 2007a; Dacks 2004; Henderson 1994; Hicks
and White 2000; McPherson 2003; Russell 2000; Rynard 2000; Saku and Bone 2000;
White 2002). Although the CLC process has become an almost hegemonic paradigm of
government-Aboriginal relations in Canada, this article argues that Aboriginal groups

should consider abandoning the CLC process if they have not been able to make
significant progress towards completing CLC treaties. Previously, many Aboriginal
groups had no better option but to negotiate CLC treaties to achieve their goals. Now,

however, a number of institutional developments have given Aboriginal peoples in
Canada a range of other options that are worth pursuing instead of CLC treaties.

The findings of this article are not limited to Canada. Other countries like the
United States, Australia, and New Zealand either have used treaties in the past or
* Department of Political Science, University of Toronto

Publius: The Journal ofFederalism volume 38 number 2, pp. 343-369

doi: 10.1093/publius/pjm036

Advance Access publication 7 December 2007
? The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CSF Associates: Publius, Inc.

All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

344

C. Alcantara

have thought about using them for restructuring the relationship between their
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal peoples (Scholtz 2006; Wilkins 2002, 28-29). As
such, the theoretical framework of this article, with its emphasis on the interplay
between preferences, incentives, strategies, and institutions during treaty negotia

tions, will be of interest to international readers in other countries that have
indigenous populations seeking to achieve self-government and self-determination.
This article, which is a case study of Aboriginal treaty negotiations in Canada, is
structured as follows. The first section provides some background information on

the CLC process in Canada. The second section constructs a theoretical framework
for understanding why many Aboriginal groups, in light of their preferences and

incentives, chose to enter the CLC process in the first place. The third section
briefly reviews the various reasons why some Aboriginal groups have been unable
to complete treaties. The fourth section describes the key institutional changes that

have broadened the option set available to those Aboriginal groups currently
involved in CLC negotiations. Finally, the article concludes by arguing that those
Aboriginal groups that have made little progress in their CLC negotiations should
explore a number of policy alternatives for achieving their preferences, at least until

governments make a number of fundamental changes to the CLC process (for a list
of suggested reforms, see Ladner 2003; Penikett 2006; RCAP 1996, Vol. 2; Woolford

2005; Abele and Prince 2003).

Background Considerations
The Canadian federal government has established two negotiation processes
for managing its treaty relationship with Aboriginal peoples: The specific claims

process and the comprehensive land claims process. The purpose of the specific
claims process is to provide an alternative process (negotiations) to the courts for
resolving allegations that the Crown failed to properly interpret or implement the
terms of a treaty. Only Aboriginal groups that have completed a treaty can access

the specific claims process. For instance, the Blood Tribe in Alberta is currently

negotiating with the federal government for unpaid compensation for lands it
surrendered through a treaty in 1889. In general, specific claims have proven to be

highly problematic and difficult to resolve (Specific Claims Branch of Indian and
Northern Affairs Canada, 2006, 2, 65).

The second process, and the one that is the focus of this article, is the CLC

process, created in 1973. Up until 1921, the federal government had been
negotiating land surrender treaties with Aboriginal peoples in western and northern

Canada. In 1921, the federal government ended its policy of negotiating new
treaties. In its place, it employed a variety of assimilation mechanisms designed to
bring Aboriginal peoples further into mainstream society. In response, Aboriginal
peoples began to organize themselves politically in the 1960s to protect their lands

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

345

and ways of life (Scholtz 2006). The key turning point was in 1973, when the
Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Colder ruled that Aboriginal title did in fact
exist. Shortly thereafter, Prime Minister Trudeau announced that his government
would begin treaty negotiations to facilitate the exchange of undefined Aboriginal
rights for a set of specific treaty rights.

Under the CLC process, an Aboriginal group submits a statement of intent to
the federal and relevant sub-national governments to prove three things: That its

rights to its claimed lands have never been extinguished; that it historically
occupied and used its claimed lands to the exclusion of other groups; and finally
that it is an identifiable and recognizable Aboriginal group (Indian and Northern
Affairs Canada 1998, 5; RCAP 1996, 536-537). Once an Aboriginal group meets
these requirements, the three parties begin negotiating a framework agreement.

This agreement sets out the issues that are to be negotiated, how they will be
negotiated, and by what date they must be resolved. A comprehensive land claims
agreement can address only a limited range of issues and must in the end provide a
full, certain, and final listing of all the rights and lands that a group may have now

and in the future. Federal policy lists the following issues as being available for

negotiations:
Under this approach, the range of matters that the federal government would

see as subjects for negotiation could include all, some, or parts of the
following: establishment of governing structures; internal constitutions;
elections; leadership selection processes; membership; marriage; adoption and

child welfare; Aboriginal language; culture and religion; education; health;
social services; administration/enforcement of Aboriginal laws, including the
establishment of Aboriginal courts or tribunals and the creation of offences of
the type normally created by local or regional governments for contravention
of their laws; policing; property rights, including succession and estates; land

management, including: zoning; service fees; land tenure and access, and
expropriation of Aboriginal land by Aboriginal governments for their own
public purposes; natural resources management; agriculture; hunting, fishing

and trapping on Aboriginal lands; taxation in respect of direct taxes and
property taxes of members; transfer and management of monies and group
assets; management of public works and infrastructure; housing; local
transportation; licensing, regulation and operation of businesses located on
Aboriginal lands." In the following areas, Aboriginal groups may gain some

power but federal and/or provincial law making authority is paramount:
"divorce; labour/training; administration of justice issues, including matters
related to the administration and enforcement of laws of other jurisdictions

which might include certain criminal laws; penitentiaries and parole;
environmental protection, assessment and pollution prevention; fisheries

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

346

C. Alcantara

co-management; migratory birds co-management; gaming; emergency
preparedness." Finally, the federal government retains law making authority

over "(i) powers related to Canadian sovereignty, defence and external
relations; and (ii) other national interest powers (Indian and Northern Affairs

Canada 1995).
Once a framework agreement is achieved, the parties negotiate a nonlegally
binding Agreement-in-Principle (AIP). AIP negotiations are by far the most
difficult and time-consuming part of the process. Most AIPs contain chapters on

eligibility and enrollment, land, access, economic development, culture and
heritage, water management, fish and wildlife, migratory birds, forest resources,
harvesting, environmental assessment, taxation, dispute resolution, implementation,

compensation, and sometimes a self-government provision. The AIP does not have

to resolve all negotiation issues. Rather, it can leave some issues for Final
Agreement negotiations. Typically, for instance, the negotiating parties will wait

until Final Agreement negotiations to negotiate the exact wording of the "cede,
release, and surrender" provision and to select the actual parcels of settlement land

to be included in the Final Agreement.
Although it is not legally binding, the AIP usually forms the basis of the Final

Agreement. Previously, an AIP did not need to be ratified for Final Agreement

negotiations to begin. However, this policy was changed after a number of
Aboriginal communities failed to ratify their Final Agreements. To reduce the
possibility that future Final Agreements will be rejected, federal policy now requires
that all Aboriginal groups ratify their AIPs before Final Agreement negotiations can

begin.
The purpose of the Final Agreement is to transform the AIP into a modern
treaty, formally transferring the negotiated settlement lands and land management

powers to the Aboriginal group. The Final Agreement also clarifies the roles and
responsibilities of each level of government in the affected lands. Once signed,
ratified, and enacted by laws passed in Parliament and the relevant sub-national
legislature, the Final Agreement becomes a constitutional document guiding future
interactions between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal peoples affected by the treaty.
In contrast to the rest of Canada, Aboriginal groups in British Columbia operate
under a slightly different process. In 1992, the federal, provincial, and Aboriginal

governments in the province agreed to create the BC Treaty Commission (BCTC)
and the BCTC process. The BC Treaty Commission, which received statutory basis

in 1995, is an independent body whose job is to oversee the BC negotiation
process, facilitate negotiations, create public awareness, and administer loans to

participating First Nations (Abele and Prince 2003, 148). The BCTC negotiation
process involves six stages. Stage One, "Statement of Intent to Negotiate," involves
First Nations submitting a statement of intent to negotiate a treaty. This statement

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

347

must identify the negotiating body and the people that are represented by that
body. It must also show that the negotiating body has a mandate to negotiate and

must list the lands being claimed and all potential overlapping claims. Stage
Two, "Readiness to Negotiate," involves the three parties meeting to determine
whether they are ready to proceed to negotiations. Stage Three, "Negotiation of
a Framework Agreement," is when the parties negotiate the "table of contents" of

the treaty. Stage Four, "Negotiation of an Agreement In Principle," involves the
parties negotiating the details of the framework agreement. Stage Five, "Negotiation

to Finalize a Treaty," is the stage when the technical and legal issues are wrapped

up and when the parties must ratify the treaty. Stage Six, "Implementation of a
Treaty," involves the parties transforming the treaty into a living document (British

Columbia Treaty Commission 2007).
Today, most of the uncompleted CLC claims in Canada are in British Columbia.
Of the 197 First Nations in B.C., approximately fifty-seven are currently involved in

the BCTC process. Outside of B.C., there are three First Nations in the Yukon
(Liard First Nation, Ross River Dena Council, and White River First Nation), one
in Labrador (the Innu), and one in the Northwest Territories (Deh Cho) that have
yet to complete CLC treaties.
In addition to being the province with the largest number of First Nations
without treaties, the BCTC process is also notable for its effect on the CLC process.

Two main changes to the CLC process have occurred as a result of the BCTC
process. One is the expansion of the CLC process to include concurrent negotia
tions for self-government agreements. The other is the introduction of a more
flexible certainty provision that does not require Aboriginal peoples to extinguish
their Aboriginal title when they sign treaties (Kulchyski 2005, 100). These changes

have encouraged other groups like the Labrador Inuit to sign treaties with the
Crown (Molloy 2000; Alcantara 2007a).

A Theoretical Framework for CLC Negotiations in Canada
The literature on Aboriginal treaties and self-determination is a rich and varied
one. In particular, the strength of the literature has been its insistence on the fact

that Aboriginal traditions and worldviews are neither easily understood nor
recognized in the world of Canadian politics and public policy (Kulchyski 2005;
Ladner 2003; Woolford 2005). Abele and Prince (2003, 150-151), for instance, have
argued that comprehensive land claims negotiations in Canada have been hindered

by fundamental differences between government and Aboriginal understandings

of the treaty process (Tully 2001). On the one hand, federal and provincial
governments see themselves as "representatives of the Crown meeting with
minorities within Canada" while on the other, Aboriginal peoples see themselves as

nations negotiating with the Crown as equals. Taiaiake Alfred (1999, 119-120) goes

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

348

C. Alcantara

even further to say that the BCTC process "represents an advanced form of control,

manipulation, and assimilation ? The basic assumptions embedded in the process
and the negotiating positions put forward in relation to indigenous peoples point
to the state's innate prejudice against justice for indigenous peoples." Others, like
Patricia Monture-Angus (1999), find that western concepts like "self-government"

and "sovereignty" are not useful for achieving justice because they remain rooted
in the colonialist history of Aboriginal peoples and the Canadian state. Instead, she

advocates for Aboriginal "independence," a word that she argues is free from the
taint of the Crown's unjust treatment of Aboriginal peoples in Canada.

Despite the fundamental incongruence between Aboriginal and Canadian
worldviews, Aboriginal peoples and the Crown continue to negotiate treaties.
Surprisingly, there has been little systematic and theoretical study of why
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal governments continue to negotiate treaties and why

Aboriginal peoples do not adopt the strategies advocated by Alfred, Monture
Angus, and others. The analytical framework presented in this section is an attempt

to theorize about why some Aboriginal groups continue to negotiate treaties
despite achieving little progress. The framework is advantageous because it is
falsifiable and can be used to make predications about the treaty process, its
participants, and its outcomes. Moreover, the framework is transferable to other
settler societies that are considering adopting Aboriginal treaty negotiation
processes like the ones used in Canada.
Fundamentally, CLC negotiations are moments in time when governments and
Aboriginal actors negotiate regime change (treaty versus no treaty). To understand

the dynamics of CLC negotiations, this section borrows from the "political
institutionalist" structure-agency framework that comparative scholars have
developed to explain democratic regime change. The political-institutionalist
framework explains regime change by focusing on the strategic interactions between

government and societal actors working for or against democratization. Actors in
this framework do not interact with each other unencumbered. Rather, they are
subject to overarching institutional structures that regulate their behavior towards
each other. In this sense, "actors make choices but not in the circumstances of their

choosing" (Munck 1994, 371).
As a number of political scientists have observed, politics is mainly about
rival actors competing for scarce resources (Hall and Taylor 1996, 937). CLC
negotiations are no different, with government and Aboriginal actors seeking to
negotiate treaties that maximize their preferences. Although "thin-rationalists"
argue that the contents of preferences do not matter, "thick-rationalists" argue that

they do matter (Shapiro and Green 1996, 17-19). The contents matter because if
the preferences of the actors are similar, then an agreement may be easier to
achieve. If actors have substantially different preferences, then an agreement may be

more difficult to achieve. Giuseppe DiPalma (1990) argues that knowing what the

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

349

preferences of the players are is important for understanding whether the crafting

of a new democratic regime will be cooperative or conflictual. If all of the
negotiating players prefer democracy, then "none of them, by definition, would be

facing a dilemma between regime alternatives. Further, sharing a bias for
democracy, they would therefore share a readiness to tolerate and trust each other"

(DiPalma 1990, 47).
Preferences alone do not determine outcomes nor do actors negotiate unencum
bered and without context. Rather, the negotiating actors are subject to incentives
(opportunities and constraints) that organize their strategic interactions with each
other. In other words, incentives determine whether or not the negotiating actors

should work towards or against a completed agreement. These incentives are
generated by the relevant institutional structures under which the actors negotiate

(North 1990). For instance, during the third wave of democratization, the urban

middle classes supported regime change because they believed that a new regime
would provide them with greater benefits than what they were receiving under
the existing regime (Huntington 1991, 67). Rueschemeyer, Stephens, and Stephens

(1992) argue that the reason why the lower classes in authoritarian countries
pursued democratization and why the upper classes opposed it was because of
their different assessments of the relationship between their preferences on the

one hand, and the existing (authoritarianism) and possible future regimes
(democratization), on the other. In the same way, government and Aboriginal
actors in the comprehensive land claims process will interact with each other

according to their preferences and their positions within the existing
regime (no treaty) and possible future regimes (a completed treaty or other
self-government models).

Knill and Lenschow (2001) have criticized structural approaches for having a
determinist bias, since everything can purportedly be explained by institutions
(Knill and Lenschow 2001, 198). They argue that structural approaches, which are
macro in level, tend to ignore the significant role that agents can play in deter
mining outcomes. Agent-based studies, on the other hand, have shown that at the
microlevel, actors can significantly affect outcomes despite the seemingly powerful

influence of institutions (Knill and Lenschow 2001, 198; Clayton and Pontusson
1998). As a result, Knill and Lenschow argue that scholars need to develop new
frameworks that account for both structure and agency.
A framework synthesizing structure and agency would have to acknowledge that
institutional structures remain important for establishing the incentives of actors
to work towards different outcomes; however, such a framework would also have

to specify that institutional structures do not predetermine political outcomes

(Encarnaci?n 2000, 486). In the words of Knill and Lenschow (2001, 195),
"Institutions are conceived as an opportunity structure that constrains and enables

the behavior of self-interested actors. Institutions limit the range of strategic

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

350

C. Alcantara

options that are available to actors, however?in contrast to structure-based
approaches?without entirely prestructuring political decisions towards certain
outcomes."
In this approach, it is up to the negotiating actors to decide which strategies
and actions to take to achieve their preferences, subject to the incentives they face.
In the case of comprehensive land claims negotiations in Canada, the relative power
that the negotiating parties have within the negotiating process is important for

understanding negotiation outcomes. Gerardo Munck (1994), makes a similar
observation of the democratization process: "Now to say actors have choices does
not mean that outcomes are random or that actors are equally likely to pick any set
of potential institutional designs. Probably the primary factor explaining the shape
of emerging institutions, as has been underlined by various authors, is the relative

power of the actors involved in the process, the rulers and the opposition"
(emphasis added) (Munck 1994, 370). In the case of CLCs in Canada, the
outcomes of negotiations are subject to the power relations between governments
on the one hand, and the negotiating Aboriginal groups, on the other. The relative

power of these actors comes from the institutional structures governing CLC
negotiations. If the power relations are not balanced, then the outcomes will
depend on the ability of the weaker actors to influence the stronger actors,
assuming their preferences are different (Rueschemeyer, Stephens, and Stephens
1992). In comprehensive land claims negotiations, as will be shown subsequently,
the federal, provincial, and territorial governments are the dominant actors and
benefit the most from the existing regime (no treaty). The Aboriginal actors, on the

other hand, are much weaker and would benefit more from negotiating a new
regime (a modern treaty).
In sum, government and Aboriginal actors in the CLC process come to the table
with their own preferences for what the process should achieve. Their propensity to
cooperate to complete a final treaty is very much influenced by the incentives that
emanate from the relevant institutional structures governing comprehensive land

claims negotiations in Canada. In the context of those incentives, the actors still
have the freedom to choose how they want to interact with each other. However,
completing a treaty requires the weaker actors (Aboriginal groups) to convince the

dominant actors (governments) that a completed treaty is in their interests
(Alcantara 2007a). In the event that the Aboriginal groups cannot convince the
governments to complete treaties, the Aboriginal groups will continue to negotiate
until viable alternatives emerge.

In the next section, I examine government and Aboriginal preferences (which
are internal to the groups) and incentives (which are derived from the institutional
structures governing treaties and treaty negotiations) to illustrate the usefulness of

this framework for understanding the dynamics of CLC negotiations in Canada.

Specifically, I draw upon empirical evidence (interviews with government and

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

Aboriginal officials) from one province (Newfoundland and Labrador) and one
territory (the Yukon Territory) in Canada.

Preferences and Incentives: Some Empirical Evidence
Preferences
The federal government in comprehensive land claims negotiations is primarily
interested in ensuring certainty and finality for the purposes of encouraging

economic development (Mitchell 1996, 343-344, 347; Rynard 2000). It is also
interested in empowering Aboriginal peoples by helping them to increase their
capacity for governance and self-sufficiency (Serson 2006; Shafto 2006). According
to INAC's (1998, 5) Federal Policy for the Settlement of Native Claims:

The primary purpose of comprehensive claims settlements is to conclude
agreements with Aboriginal groups that will resolve the debates and legal
ambiguities associated with the common law concept of Aboriginal rights and
title. Uncertainty with respect to the legal status of lands and resources, which

has been created by a lack of political agreement with Aboriginal groups, is a
barrier to economic development for all Canadians and has hindered the full

participation of Aboriginal peoples in land and resource management.
These policy goals, especially the drive for development, have been confirmed by

Aboriginal, federal, provincial, and territorial officials (Ben Andrew 2006; John
Pierre Ashini 2006; Innes 2006; Andersen III 2006; Shafto 2006; Serson 2006;
Mitander 2006; Gingell 2006). Yet government actions have not always respected or

benefited those Aboriginal groups whose lands were being developed. In many
instances, the federal government provided permits, tax breaks, and infrastructure

to encourage businesses to engage in economic development on Aboriginal lands,

despite opposition from Aboriginal and other stakeholder groups (Angus 1992,
68-69; Miller 2000, 365-366; Nuke 2006; McPherson 2003, 142).

Canadian provincial governments are also driven by economic development
concerns. In Newfoundland and Labrador, for instance, Minister Ernest McLean
has said (2001), "successful land claims negotiations with the LIA [Labrador Inuit

Association] and the Innu will ensure economic, legal and social certainty for
governance and business and social development." Settling these claims is necessary

because Labrador is the key to the economic health of the entire province.
According to Minister Tom Rideout (2004),
The goal of this government is to achieve economic health for the province.

Building the economic health of Labrador is a key part of that plan. We are

building a strong foundation that will enable all regions of the province to

achieve their enormous potential. From what I have seen during my visit

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

351

C. Alcantara

352

to Labrador, the potential there is certainly enormous_ As we move
forward with implementing the strategy, our investments will be made where
they will have the most positive impact for all regions of the province.

Others have reiterated that economic development should benefit all provincial
citizens and should not be at the expense of Aboriginal peoples in the province
(Pelley 2006). "It is imperative that we ensure any land claim settlement reached

with the Inuit and Innu are fair to all Labradorians?Aboriginal and non
Aboriginal" (Lush 2001). In sum,
The provincial government's objective in negotiating comprehensive land
claim agreements is to achieve certain and final settlement of Aboriginal
claims to territory within the Province. Certainty as to the ownership of lands

and how such lands are to be managed will provide a more stable environ

ment for development and investment_Settlement of the land claim is
necessary to provide for the long term economic and social development

of the province, and contribute to the economic, social and cultural
development of Labrador Inuit claimants. Negotiations are intended to
accommodate the interests of Labrador Inuit, governments and third parties

(Executive Council 1997).
The actions of the provincial government, however, do not reflect its stated

belief that economic development should benefit both Aboriginal and non
Aboriginal peoples. Between the 1970s and 1990s, the provincial government
engaged in a number of economic development projects in Labrador without
consulting the Innu or the Inuit. These projects included commercial logging,
mining, fishing, hydroelectric projects, military bases, and low-level flying by
military aircrafts (Nuke 2006; Rich 2006; Tony Andersen 2006). According to
members of both Aboriginal groups, governments and businesses have benefited
from these developments much more than the affected Aboriginal groups (John
Pierre Ashini 2006; Nuke 2006; Andrew 2006; Riche 2006; Tony Andersen 2006;
Jararuse 2006).
Territorial governments are also very interested in economic development. The

Yukon territorial government has long been interested in maximizing the
development of its lands for the purposes of enhancing the well-being of its citizens

(McArthur 2006; Penikett 2006; Flynn 2006; McCullough 2006; McCormick 2001,
369; Cameron and White 1995, 12). It has for many years, lobbied the federal
government to transfer to it control over Yukon lands and resources (McCormick

2001; McArthur 2006; Armour 2006; McCullough 2006). As in Labrador, the
Yukon territorial government, the federal government, and private companies

have long engaged in economic development on Yukon Indian lands despite the
opposition of Yukon First Nations.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

In contrast, the preferences of Aboriginal groups involved in the CLC process

are much broader. In general, Aboriginal groups want to maximize their control
over their traditional lands to protect their traditional ways of life and practices.

They also want to protect their interests in and derive tangible benefits from
economic development and they desire greater control over their lives in areas such
as education, taxation, health, law enforcement, environmental protection, culture,

heritage, fishing, and hunting (Samson, Wilson, and Mazower 1999, 30-34;
Wadden 1991, 200; Jack 1990, 23; Andrew 2006; Nuke 2006; Porter 2006; Mitander

2006; Joe 2006; Beaudoin 2006; O'Brien 2006). Finally, Aboriginal peoples are
interested in acquiring justice for past wrongs, such as the restitution of their
traditional lands of which they were illegally dispossessed. Although concepts such
as rights, justice, and sovereignty are sometimes discussed at the negotiating table,

most of the time negotiations focus on economic and governance goals. According

to the interviews, I conducted with Aboriginal negotiators, civil servants, and
politicians, Aboriginal groups involved in CLC negotiations are mainly interested in

how the above abstract concepts can be translated into practical economic and
governance goods.
Incentives
In general, the federal, provincial and territorial governments face powerful
disincentives to complete an agreement. The actual CLC process, with its formal
rules and procedures, places Aboriginal groups in a weaker position relative to the
federal and provincial/territorial governments. The process forces Aboriginal groups
to prove to the governments that their claims are valid and therefore acceptable for
negotiations. During the actual negotiations, Aboriginal groups must adopt western

forms of knowledge, proof, and discourse if they want negotiations to proceed.

Rather than, being able to use their traditional knowledge, languages, and oral

histories in negotiations, they are forced to produce maps, hire white
anthropologists, linguists, lawyers and historians to prepare and document their

claims, and engage in formal proposal-counter proposal negotiations, all in the
English language (Samson 2003; Macklem 2001, 271-272; Michel 2006; Andrew
2006; John-Pierre Ashini 2006; McPherson 2003, 140; Nadasdy 2003; Kulchyski

2005). This can be a problem in Aboriginal communities where traditional
languages remain dominant. Moreover, Aboriginal groups have little power to

influence the agenda as they can only negotiate those responsibilities and
jurisdictions that are listed under the federal comprehensive land claims policy
(INAC 1998, 7-8). Finally, the government can at any time declare that certain
lands are no longer on the table for negotiation. This action, for instance, occurred
in 1994, when the Voisey's Bay area in Labrador was taken off the table after large
nickel deposits were found there.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

353

354

C. Alcantara

In essence, under the CLC process, the federal, provincial and territorial
governments have become rights-granting entities while the Aboriginal groups have
become petitioners, forced to prove the validity of their claims to the governments

before they can receive lands, rights, self-government, and jurisdictions (Samson

2003; Andrew 2006; Backhouse and McRae 2002, 58). Bolstering the authority of
Canadian governments is the Constitution Act of 1982, which gives them a wide
range of powers over the lands, water bodies, and peoples in Canada. As mentioned

earlier, federal, provincial, and territorial governments have used their constitu

tional powers to engage in development on Aboriginal lands despite Aboriginal
opposition (Nui 2006; Rich 2006; Andersen III 2006; Tony Andersen 2006; Andrew
2006; Marshall 2006).
Government incentives are also affected by the negotiation stakes. Much of the

powers and lands involved in comprehensive land claims negotiations involve
Crown lands and jurisdictions. The federal government tends to be interested in
cash transfers, taxation, implementation costs, fisheries, migratory birds, and
environmental protection. The provinces, on the other hand, have jurisdiction over
inland water, economic development, renewable and nonrenewable resources, land,

environmental protection, and local governance. Overall, provincial governments
have much more at stake in negotiations than the federal government (Pelley 2006;

Carter 2006; Feit 1980), meaning that the main task of Aboriginal groups is to
convince the provinces that a modern treaty is consistent with their interests (INAC

1998, 6-7; Hawco 2006; Rowell 2006). The same can be generally said about the
territories. Traditionally, the federal government took the lead in negotiations
because it had primary jurisdiction over territorial lands and resources. However,
the territorial governments quickly became more important because the treaties,

once completed, had a larger impact on them than on the federal government
(Armour 2006; McCullough 2006; McArthur 2006).

Canadian courts have provided governments with mixed incentives. For
instance, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in Delgamuukw v. British Columbia
(1997) that the federal government can infringe upon Aboriginal rights for the
greater good of economic development. However, the Crown is still bound by its

fiduciary duty to take into account Aboriginal concerns prior to engaging in
development (Macklem 2001, 252-253). Subsequent court cases in 2004 have tried
to clarify the Crown's fiduciary duty and these cases are discussed subsequently.
Other incentives to negotiate have come from a growing awareness of Aboriginal

rights. Former Deputy Minister of INAC Scott Serson (2006) mentioned that
federal bureaucrats and negotiators felt enormous pressure to complete treaties
after the publication of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (RCAP 1996).
They felt they had to demonstrate that they could successfully address the concerns

raised in RCAP about treaty making in Canada. Yukon territorial government
officials also mentioned that in addition to legal certainty, they were interested in

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

355

correcting the historical wrongs inflicted by the Crown on Yukon First Nations

peoples (McCullough 2006; Armour 2006; Flynn 2006). Floyd McCormick (1997)
disagrees with these characterizations and argues that government motivations tend
to be overwhelmingly economic in nature.

Aboriginal groups, on the other hand, face powerful incentives to negotiate
a CLC treaty. First and most importantly, they have no better option to adequately
satisfy their preferences within the current institutional framework. A number of
Aboriginal officials have mentioned that the comprehensive land claims process is

the "only game in town" for achieving the type of control they want over their
lands (Rich 2006; Riche 2006; Jararuse 2006; Hibbs 2006; Andersen III 2006; Porter

2006; Dick 2006; Sterriah 2006; Beaudoin 2006). Aboriginal groups throughout

Canada have considered and used litigation, but judicial outcomes are
unpredictable and can be as damaging as helpful (Macklem and Townshend
1992, 78-79; Monture-Angus 1999; Feit 1980, 163; Penikett 2006). Other
Aboriginal groups have used protest tactics, but these tactics do not really let
Aboriginal groups gain the type of control they want. The Innu in the 1980s and
early-1990s, for instance, were one of the most active groups in Canada in using
protests and other confrontational strategies. However, as of 2001, the Innu have
focused solely on negotiations because their confrontation strategies produced
uneven results (Innes 2006; Riche 2006; Rich 2006).

Aboriginal groups face another incentive to negotiate, mainly that "once it
became clear that development was going to happen even in the absence of a
settlement, pressure began to grow at the community level to resolve claims and
to "catch a ride" on the development that was occurring" (Angus 1992, 71).
Aboriginal groups realize that governments will engage in economic development
on their lands anyway, so negotiating CLC treaties are the only way to ensure that
their interests are protected (Rich, 2006; Jararuse 2006; Joe 2006; Mitander 2006;

Porter 2006; Dick 2006; see also McPherson 2003 regarding Inuit in Nunavut; and

Rynard 2001, 12-13 regarding the Cree in Quebec).2

Why Have Some Aboriginal Groups Failed to Complete Treaties?
Scholars have offered a number of reasons for why some Aboriginal groups have

been unable to complete CLC treaties. Rynard (2001), Feit (1980), and Diamond
(1985) have argued that treaties get completed only when federal and provincial
governments are subject to significant economic development pressures. Others
have argued that fundamental differences in governmental and Aboriginal world
views have prevented some groups from completing treaties (Abele and Prince
2003, 150-151; Tully 2001). Tony Penikett (2006) places the blame for incomplete
treaties on the federal, provincial, and territorial governments. Specifically, he
criticizes their inflexible political mandates, their lack of political will, and their

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

356

C. Alcantara

failure to provide sufficient incentives to their negotiators to complete agreements

quickly. Finally, Alcantara (2007a) points to the importance of the Aboriginal
groups themselves in determining CLC negotiation outcomes. For him, one
external factor and three internal factors relative to the Aboriginal groups affect
their ability to complete treaties. These factors are: Compatible versus incompatible

goals (internal); frequent versus minimal use of confrontational tactics (internal);

Aboriginal group internal cohesion versus Aboriginal group internal division
(internal); and positive versus negative government perceptions of the Aboriginal

group (external).
Regardless of the reasons, since 1973, twenty-two Aboriginal groups have
completed treaties whereas many others have not. Some of these negotiations have
gone on for almost thirty-five years. In addition, most, if not all, Aboriginal groups

participating in the CLC process have borrowed money from the federal govern
ment to pay for their negotiating costs. In some cases, as a result of negotiations
dragging on for far too long, the amount of money that they borrowed from the

federal government has equaled or surpassed the amount that they were supposed
to receive under their treaty settlements (Mitander 2006; Porter 2006; Walsh 2006).

As a result, a number of groups have dropped out of the CLC process, or have
shown no interest in returning to the table despite negotiating for many years. The

most recent group to drop out of the CLC process was the Carrier Sekani First
Nations in British Columbia, who left the negotiating table in March 2007 after
thirteen years. One reason why they dropped out of the process was because
their leaders decided that negotiations had become a waste of money as a result
of little progress occurring. A second reason was because, in the words of Tribal
Chief David Luggi, "While they keep us talking at the table, resource extraction
continues" on their traditional lands (Brethour 2007, A2).
Another group that has rejected the CLC process was the Kaska in the Yukon
Territory. The Kaska were part of the fourteen Yukon First Nations that entered the
CLC process in 1973. After failing to negotiate a Final Agreement in June 2002, the

federal mandate to negotiate in the Yukon Territory expired. Although there has
been some talk of reopening negotiations over the last several years, Kaska leaders
have indicated that they are no longer interested in negotiating a CLC treaty. One

reason why they abandoned the treaty process was because it was too expensive
to continue negotiating. They were also frustrated that the federal and territorial
governments were using Kaska lands during negotiations. Finally, Kaska leaders felt
that the treaty process was too rigid to allow them to negotiate the type of control

that they want over their traditional lands (McMillan 2006; Porter 2006; Dixon

2006).

The reasons offered by the Carrier Sekani First Nations and the Kaska for
dropping out of the treaty process illustrate the usefulness of the structure-agency
framework described earlier. Both groups originally entered the treaty negotiation

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

357

process because, it was the best option available to them for achieving their
economic and political goals. Indeed, both groups negotiated for thirteen and
twenty-nine years, respectively, before dropping out of the negotiating process.

Their decision to drop out of process was facilitated by a number of recent
institutional developments that broaded the choice set beyond CLC negotiations.
These developments are described in the next section subsequently.

The Broadening of Aboriginal Options
Two institutional developments have provided negotiating Aboriginal groups with

a set of alternative options that are preferable to continued CLC negotiations.
The first development was two recent court decisions handed down by the Supreme

Court of Canada in 2004. The second development was the emergence of new
policy instruments outside of the CLC process that Aboriginal groups can now use

to achieve their goals. These developments, which are explored in greater detail
subsequently, represent fundamental changes to the incentive structures facing
Aboriginal peoples. Whereas previously, Aboriginal peoples had no better option to
achieve their economic and political goals, they now face a set of alternatives that
are preferable to the compromises that are necessary to complete CLC treaties.

Judicial Decisions

In November 2004, the Supreme Court of Canada handed down two crucial
decisions that had important implications for the nature of Aboriginal rights and

title in Canada: Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests), 2004 SCC
73, [2004] 3S.C.R. 511, and Taku River Tlingit First Nation v. British Columbia
(Project Assessment Director), 2004 SCC 74, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 550. In both cases, the
First Nations sought the court's help to clarify the Crown's duty to consult and
accommodate them prior to the Crown's development of their traditional lands.
The court ruled that prior to developing these lands, the Crown must engage in
meaningful consultation with the Aboriginal groups, and if appropriate, accom
modate their concerns. In Taku River, the court ruled that "The duty to consult
arises when a Crown actor has knowledge, real or constructive, of the potential

existence of Aboriginal rights or title and contemplates conduct that might
adversely affect them. This in turn may lead to a duty to change government plans
or policy to accommodate Aboriginal concerns. Responsiveness is a key requirement

of both consultation and accommodation" (para. 25). In Haida Nation, the court
ruled that the government's duty to consult should be "proportionate to a prelimi
nary assessment of the strength of the case supporting the existence of the right or
title, and to the seriousness of the potentially adverse effect upon the right or title

claimed" (para. 39). Yet, consultation and accommodation does not mean a duty
to reach agreement with an Aboriginal group. In Taku River, the court ruled that

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 ff on Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

358

C. Alcantara

"the Province was not under a duty to reach agreement with the TRTFN [Taku
River Tlingit First Nation] and its failure to do so did not breach the obligations of

good faith that it owned to TRTFN" (para. 22).
In essence, these rulings give Aboriginal groups greater leverage to affect the
ability of governments and private companies to use their traditional lands, even if
their rights have yet to be clarified through litigation or a treaty. At a minimum,

the federal and provincial governments must consult and/or accommodate any

Aboriginal groups that have some claim to the affected lands. The level of
consultation and accommodation must be proportionate to the strength of the
group's case for Aboriginal title. One way of assessing strength, according to the

court in Taku River (para. 32), is whether an Aboriginal group has been accepted
into treaty negotiations. If so, the government's duty to consult and accommodate

is quite strong.

These two court decisions are important because Aboriginal groups no longer
have to rely solely on a CLC agreement to protect their interests in their traditional
lands. Now, Aboriginal groups involved in the CLC process can explore alternative

options that may cost less and are more effective in providing immediate
and preferable results. The rest of this article discusses three alternatives to the

treaty process that Aboriginal groups should consider pursuing. They are:
Self-government agreements, bilateral agreements, and the First Nations Land
Management Act.
Alternative Policy Instruments
Self-Government Agreements
Strictly speaking, a comprehensive land claims agreement is completely different

and separate from a self-government agreement. When the Kwanlin D?n First
Nation in the Yukon Territory completed its modern treaty with the federal and
territorial governments in 2005, for instance, it signed two separate documents:

The Kwanlin D?n First Nation Final Agreement and the Kwanlin D?n First Nation

Self-Government Agreement. Although it is common for Aboriginal groups to
negotiate both agreements concurrently, they are not required to do so and can
choose to negotiate only one or the other.

Groups that have become frustrated with comprehensive land claims negotia
tions should seriously consider focusing all of their efforts on negotiating a self
government agreement. An advantage of doing so is that it simplifies negotiations,

since only the Aboriginal group and the federal government are involved.
Moreover, a completed self-government agreement prior to a CLC agreement
allows the Aboriginal group to build capacity and exercise tribal sovereignty that is

compatible with local needs and interests. These two advantages are important
because scholars have identified them as being necessary conditions for successful

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

359

economic development on Canadian Indian reserves (Cornell and Kalt 1992;
Alcantara 2007b). At Kwanlin D?n First Nation, leaders have replaced the old band

council structure with a Chief and Council supported by an Elders Council, a
Youth Council, the General Assembly, and a Judicial Council. Kwanlin Dun's self
government agreement also recognizes that the First Nation is a legal entity for
the purposes of borrowing, lending, and transacting. Its new government can pass

laws affecting language, culture, health care, training, adoption, education,
inheritance and wills, solemnization of marriage, administration of its reserve lands,

administration of justice, and taxation of its citizens, among other things. These
powers are more extensive and are a clear improvement on the powers available to

band councils under the Indian Act.3

One First Nation that has signed a self-government agreement prior to
completing a comprehensive land claims agreement is Westbank First Nation,
located near Kelowna, British Columbia. Westbank First Nation entered the British
Columbia Treaty Commission process in 1994, completing a framework agreement

in 1997. Since then, however, the First Nation has made little progress in
negotiating an AIP with the federal and provincial governments. According to Tim

Raybould, Westbank's chief negotiator, "Treaty negotiations have not been
'negotiations' for many years. Governments come to the table with poorly thought

out take-it-or-leave-it positions that serve neither the province nor Canada well,
nor, indeed, first nations. Treaties have become way too complicated. They are not
designed to be living documents but rather 'full and final settlement,' a dangerous

approach that may result in future conflict. If B.C. and Canada truly want
economic certainty, they had better realize who actually needs the treaties"
(Raybould, 2007). In contrast, Westbank self-government negotiations were much

more successful. On July 6, 2000, Westbank First Nation and federal negotiators
initialed the Westbank First Nation Self-Government Agreement. They brought it

to the community for ratification, which they did on May 24, 2003. Finally, the
parties formally signed the agreement on October 3, 2003. Under the agreement,

Westbank has been able to design its own governing institutions and exercise
a number of important powers. It has passed laws governing wills and estates,
taxation, management of reserve lands, resource management, agriculture,
environmental protection, culture and language, education, health services, law
enforcement, traffic enforcement, public order, and public works, among other
things. Although Westbank's CLC negotiations have stalled, it has been able to use
its self-government agreement to build capacity and craft laws that are sensitive to

local needs.

Bilateral Agreements
A second option that Aboriginal groups should consider exploring is the use of
bilateral agreements with governments and private companies. These bilateral

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

360

C. Alcantara

agreements tend to be used to seek agreement on particular issues. For instance,
the Kaska signed a bilateral agreement with the Yukon territorial government to
co-manage the forest resources on its traditional lands (Bi-Lateral Agreement
Between the Kaska and the Yukon Government 2003). The Carrier Sekani First

Nations in British Columbia withdrew from the treaty process in March 2007 to
explore bilateral agreements with private companies such as Canfor Corporation
to develop the natural resources on their lands (Brethour 2007, A2).
Besides the time and monetary advantages that come from negotiating specific
agreements between only two parties, bilateral agreements give Aboriginal groups

a number of other advantages. First, it allows the Aboriginal groups to gain
immediate control and input into the use of their lands. The decisions in Taku
River and Haida Nation require the federal and provincial/territorial governments

to consult and/or accommodate Aboriginal groups before issuing licenses or
engaging in development on Aboriginal lands. A second advantage of bilateral
agreements is that the governments have shown more flexibility to what they are

willing to agree. For instance, although the Yukon territorial government refused

the Kaska's demand for a veto over land use during CLC negotiations, the
territorial government was willing to accept a Kaska veto in their 2003 bilateral

agreement co-managing forest resources on Kaska lands. The preamble of this
agreement states: "WHEREAS: Yukon acknowledge, in agreements entered into
with the Kaska in January 1997, that the Kaska have Aboriginal rights, titles,

and interest in and to the Kaska Traditional Territory in the Yukon"

(Bi-Lateral Agreement Between the Kaska and the Yukon Government 2003, 1).
Under Section 3, entitled "Kaska Consent," the agreement states: "Yukon shall
not agree to any significant or major dispositions of interests in lands or resources

or significant or major authorizations for exploration work and resource
development in the Kaska Traditional Territory without consulting and obtaining
the consent of the Kaska" (Bi-Lateral Agreement Between the Kaska and the Yukon

Government 2003, 4). The Yukon territorial government was willing to agree to a
Kaska veto in the bilateral agreement because, it was not a treaty agreement.

Moreover, the government at the time was keen on developing the rich forest

resources on Kaska lands and was cognizant of its duty to consult and/or
accommodate Kaska interests before it could extract those resources (Armour 2006;

McCullough 2006; Flynn 2006).
In sum, bilateral agreements show promise in giving Aboriginal peoples
immediate and significant control over resource developments on their lands.
Moreover, bilateral agreement negotiations tend to be quicker, more cost effective,
and focused, since the stakes are lower and considerably less complex. Governments

have shown a willingness to be more flexible in recognizing Aboriginal rights and
title in these types of agreements than they are during comprehensive land claims
negotiations. There are limitations, however, to bilateral agreements. They tend to

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

be used only for resource development projects and not for other purposes like
fishing and hunting rights. Moreover, they tend to last for a specific period of time,

meaning that the rights that Aboriginal groups may gain in bilateral agreements
may not transfer over to future agreements.

First Nations Land Management Act
For those groups that are reluctant to take on the responsibilities that flow from
a self-government agreement, another option is to opt into the First Nations Land

Management Act (FNLMA), passed by the federal government in 1999. In essence,

the FNLMA allows an Aboriginal group to opt out of the land management
provisions of the Indian Act to develop its own land code for managing its reserve
lands. Originally, only fourteen First Nations were allowed to participate in 1999.

Since then, forty-one bands have opted into the FNLMA, ninety have inquired

about doing so, and eighteen have had their land codes in operation (Alcantara

2007b).

The FNLMA provides Aboriginal groups with a number of advantages. First,
there is very little negotiating involved. Under the FNLMA, a First Nation develops

and drafts a land code, submits it to a jointly appointed verifier, negotiates
a funding agreement with Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, and then holds

a community vote on both the land code and the funding agreement. Once
approved, the verifier certifies the land code and the First Nation takes over all land
management responsibilities from the Crown. The average time to complete a land

code is three years (Isaac 2005; Alcantara 2007b).
Second, an Aboriginal group operating under the FNLMA benefits from capacity
building and tribal sovereignty. These groups are free to design land management
regimes as they see fit. Most land codes address individual property rights, collec

tive property rights, leases and licenses, matrimonial property rules, dispute
resolution involving band lands, and other law-making powers related to the
management of an Aboriginal group's lands. Some groups have designed land
management regimes that mimic off-reserve regimes, while others have combined
the efficiency of off-reserve regimes with local customs such as expropriation to

meet the needs of the community as a whole. At a minimum, land codes reduce
transaction costs by eliminating the involvement of the federal government in the

management of reserve lands (Alcantara 2007b).4

Conclusion
This article has added to the existing literature on CLC treaties by providing
a useful theoretical framework for understanding the relationship between the
preferences and the incentives (which are derived from the relevant institu
tional structures) that drive Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal governments to

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

361

362

C. Alcantara

negotiate treaties. Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal actors come to the table with a

set of goals that they want to achieve. Their ability to achieve these goals is
influenced by the institutional structures governing their interactions. As well, the
outcomes of negotiations are strongly affected by the distribution of power between

the participating actors. In Canada, the institutional structures privilege
government interests over Aboriginal ones, much to the detriment of Aboriginal

peoples, unless their interests happen to coincide with government ones. These

findings are not only applicable to Canada. Rather, other settler societies (like
Australia, New Zealand, and the United States) that are considering adjusting their
intergovernmental structures to constitutionally entrench Aboriginal governments
will find this theoretical framework highly relevant.

This article has also tried to argue that those Aboriginal groups that have
not been able to complete treaties within a reasonable amount of time should
consider exiting the process to pursue the alternatives described earlier. Aboriginal

groups should place these alternatives on a continuum. On the one end, bilateral
agreements provide Aboriginal groups with immediate control over specific uses of

their traditional lands. In the middle, the FNLMA gives Aboriginal groups
significant land management authority over their reserve lands, much more so than

bilateral agreements. At the other end of the continuum are self-government
agreements, which combine the FNLMA's land management powers with the
option of constructing governing institutions that regulate citizen behavior in
culturally sensitive ways.

These alternatives, however, are not without their limitations. Bilateral agree
ments tend to have expiry dates built into them and are usually limited in scope.
jSelf-government agreements and the FNLMA land codes are more permanent and
broader in nature, but they only apply to the reserve lands that the groups already

own. Comprehensive land claims, on the other hand, allow Aboriginal groups
to increase and make permanent the amount of lands that they can control.
Moreover, by opting into these policy alternatives, Aboriginal groups may be under
mining their ability achieve meaningful self-government and self-determination.

Despite these concerns, Aboriginal groups that have yet to complete treaties
should consider dropping out of the process to pursue the alternatives described
earlier. These alternatives are preferable to the status quo (no treaties and Indian

Act governance) since, the status quo gives Aboriginal peoples the least amount
of control over their lands and peoples. They are also preferable to litigation and
protests, since such strategies sometimes generate significant legal defeats and
substantial negative publicity among non-Aboriginal government actors and the
general public. Continued treaty negotiations is also not an acceptable option for
some groups, since the theoretical framework above suggests that the process

is unable to accommodate Aboriginal interests and goals that are significantly
different from government ones.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada

363

In contrast, the alternatives described earlier are promising in two respects. First,

they provide Aboriginal peoples with highly useful tools for achieving some of the
essential elements of Aboriginal self-determination within a relatively short time

frame. Second, self-government agreements and land codes represent significant
opportunities for capacity building. The human and financial resources generated
by such alternatives can be used by Aboriginal groups to more successfully achieve

a broader and more just conception of Aboriginal self-determination within the

Canadian state.

Notes
The author would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers of this journal for providing

helpful advice on an earlier version of this manuscript.
1. As far as I can tell, the first author to use the phrase "to treaty or not to treaty" as a tide

or heading in a published work is Peter Sand (1999).
2. An alternative argument is that Aboriginal peoples see protests and litigation as
important tools for creating space and recognition of Aboriginal demands. Although
Aboriginal groups did rely on such strategies to create space during the early periods of

Aboriginal mobilization, many groups have begun to turn away from such strategies
because they tend to produce unpredictable and harmful results (unpredictable judicial

decisions) and/or negative feelings among non-Aboriginal government actors and the

public (as a result of public protests, occupations, and blockades).
3. The Indian Act is a federal piece of legislation governing almost all aspects of Aboriginal
life on Canadian Indian reserves. The Act, for instance, addresses governance structures,

taxation rules, by law powers, membership codes, and property rights, among other
things.

4. On the importance of reducing transaction costs for economic development, see Akee

2006.

References
Abele, Frances, and Michael J. Prince. 2003. Aboriginal governance and Canadian federalism:
A to-do list for Canada. In New Trends in Canadian Federalism, eds. Fran?ois Rocher, and

Miriam Smith. Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press.

Akee, Randall. 2006. Checkerboards and coase: Transactions costs and efficiency in land
markets. Discussion Paper No. 2438, Institute for the Study of Labor.

Alcantara, Christopher. 2007a. Explaining Aboriginal treaty negotiation outcomes in
Canada: The cases of the Inuit and the Innu in Labrador. Canadian Journal of Political
Science 40 (1): 185-207.
Alcantara, Christopher. 2007b. Reduce transaction costs? Yes. Strengthen property rights?

Maybe. The First Nations Land Management Act and economic development on Canadian
Indian reserves. Public Choice 132 (3-4): 421-432.
Alfred, Taiaiake. 1999. Peace, power, righteousness. Toronto: Oxford University Press.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

364 C. Alcantara

Andersen, Tony. 2006. Former LIA vice president and current first minister, Department of
Nunatsiavut Affairs. Personal Interview. Nain, Labrador, February 20.

Andersen III, William. 2006. Former LIA president and current Nunatsiavut Government
president. Personal Interview, Nain, Labrador, February 23.

Andrew, Ben. 2006. Innu Nation Official. Personal Interview. Sheshatshiu, Labrador,
February 13.
Angus, Murray. 1992. Comprehensive claims: One step forward, two steps back. In Nation

to nation: Aboriginal sovereignty and the future of Canada, eds. Diane Engelstad, and
John Bird. Concord, ON: Anansi.
Armour, Karyn. 2006. Assistant Deputy Minister for YT land claims secretariat. Personal
interview. Whitehorse, YT, October 24.
Ashini, John-Pierre. 2006. Innu Nation official. Personal interview. Sheshatshiu, Labrador,

February 13.

Backhouse, Catherine and Donald McRae. 2002. Canadian Human Rights Commission on
the treatment of the Innu of Labrador by the Government of Canada. Ottawa: Canadian

Human Rights Commission, March 26.
Beaudoin, Tom. 2006. Land claims director, Kwanlin Dun First Nation. Personal interview.

Whitehorse, YT, October 26.
Bi-Lateral Agreement Between the Kaska and the Yukon Government. Whitehorse, YT, 2003.

Brethour, Patrick. 2007. Band to withdraw from treaty talks. Globe and Mail A2.
British Columbia Treaty Commission. 2007. Six-stages: Policies and procedures. Website at:
http://www.bctreaty.net/files/sixstages.php (accessed February 15, 2007).

Cameron, Kirk and Graham White. 1995. Northern governments in transition: Political
and Constitutional development in the Yukon, Nunavut, and the Western Northwest
Territories. Montreal: Institute for Research on Public Policy.

Carter, Ruby. 2006. Senior provincial negotiator for the Inuit file. Personal interview.
St John's, Newfoundland, February 27.

Clayton, Richard, and Jonas Pontusson. 1998. Welfare state retrenchment revisited:
entitlement cuts, public sector restructuring, and inegalitarian trends in advanced capitalist

societies. World Politics 1: 67-98.

Cornell, S, and J. Kalt. 1992. Reloading the dice: Improving the chances of economic
development on American Indian reservations. In What can tribes do? Strategies and
institutions in American Indian Economic Development, eds. S Cornell, and J. Kalt.
Los Angeles, University of California at Los Angeles, American Indian Studies Center.

Dacks, Gurston. 2004. Implementing First Nations self-government in the Yukon: Lessons

for Canada. Canadian Journal of Political Science 37 (3): 671-694.
Diamond, Billy. 1985. Aboriginal rights: The James Bay experience. In The quest for justice:

Aboriginal peoples and Aboriginal rights, eds. Menno Boldt, J. Anthony Long, and
Leroy Little Bear. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada 365

Dick, Hammond. 2006. Kaska tribal council hereditary chief. Personal interview. Watson
Lake, YT, October 31.
DiPalma, Giuseppe. 1990. To craft democracies: An essay in democratic transitions. Berkeley:

University of California Press.

Dixon, Dave. 2006. Liard First Nation band councillor. Personal interview. Watson Lake,

YT, October 31.
Encarnaci?n, Omar G. 2000. Beyond transitions: The politics of democratic consolidation.

Comparative Politics 32 (4): 479-498.

Executive Council. 1997. Backgrounder #2: Land claims backgrounder. St John's:
Executive Council of Newfoundland and Labrador, November 5. Available at: http://
www.releases.gov. nl.ca (accessed April 10, 2006).
Feit, Harvey A. 1980. Negotiating recognition of Aboriginal rights: History, strategies
and reactions to the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement. Canadian Journal of

Anthropology 1 (2): 159-172.

Flynn, Dermot. 2006. Chief YT negotiator for the Kaska and Kwanlin D?n files,
1983-present. Personal interview. Whitehorse, YT, October 24.

Gingell, Judy. 2006. Bios - Judy Gingell, president and CEO, Kwanlin Development
Corp. Kwanlin D?n First Nation Website. Website at: http://www.kwanlinDun.com
(accessed February 15, 2007).
Hall, Peter, and Rosemary Taylor. 1996. Political science and the three new institutionalisms.

Political Studies XLIV, 936-957.
Hawco, Ray. 2006. Former provincial chief negotiator for Newfoundland and Labrador.
Personal interview. St. John's, Nfld, February 26.

Henderson, James, and Youngblood. 1994. Empowering treaty federalism. Saskatchewan Law

Review 158: 241.

Hibbs, Mina Campbell. 2006. LIA board member. Personal interview. North West River,
Labrador, February 16.
Hicks, Jack, and Graham White. 2000. Nunavut: Inuit self-determination through a land
claim and public government? In Inuit regain control of their lands and their lives, eds.

Jens Dahl, Jack Hicks, and Peter Jull. Copenhagen: International Work Group for
Indigenous Affairs.

Huntington, Samuel. 1991. The third wave: Democratization in the late twentieth century.

Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC). 1998. Federal policy for the settlement of native
claims. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada.
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. 1995. Federal policy guide: Aboriginal self-government.

Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada.

Innes, Larry. 2006. Innu Nation lawyer and negotiator. Telephone interview. Happy Valley

Goose Bay, Labrador, March 7.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

366 C. Alcantara

Isaac, Thomas. 2005. First Nations Land Management Act and third party interests. Alberta

Law Review 42: 1047-1060.

Jack, Bart. 1990. Labrador in the '90s. Happy Valley-Goose Bay: Labrador Institute.
Jararuse, John. 2006. Inuit elder. Personal interview. Nain, Labrador, February 23.

Joe, Dave. 2006. Former legal counsel for Council of Yukon Indians, negotiator on the
Umbrella Final Agreement. Personal interview. Vancouver, B.C., October 16.

Knill, Christoph, and Andrea Lenschow. 2001. Seek and ye shall find! Linking
different perspectives on institutional change. Comparative Political Studies 34:

187-215.

Kulchyski, Peter. 2005. Like the sound of a drum: Aboriginal cultural politics in Denendeh and

Nunavut. Winnipeg, MB: University of Manitoba Press.

Ladner, Kiera. 2003. Treaty federalism: An indigenous vision of Canadian federalisms.
In New trends in Canadian federalism, eds. Francois Rocher, and Miriam Smith.
Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press.

Lush, Tom. 2001. Speaking notes for the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, 8c
government house leader. In Directions north: Labrador in the new century, ed.
Martha Macdonald. Happy Valley-Goose Bay: Labrador Institute.
Macklem, Patrick. 2001. Indigenous difference and the constitution of Canada. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Macklem, Patrick, and Roger Townshend. 1992. Resorting to court: Can the judiciary deliver

justice for First Nations? In Nation to nation: Aboriginal sovereignty and the future of

Canada, eds. Diane Engelstad, and John Bird. Concord, ON: Anansi.

Marshall, Harold. 2006. Former senior civil servant for Newfoundland and Labrador.
Telephone interview. St John's, NL, March 5.

McArthur, Doug. 2006. Former Deputy Minister YT Land Claims Secretariat 1989-1992.
Personal interview. Vancouver, BC, October 20.
McCormick, Floyd. 2001. Still frontier, always homeland: Yukon politics in the year 2000.

In The provincial state in Canada: Politics in the provinces and territories, eds.
Keith Brownsey, and Michael Howlett. Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press.
McCormick, Floyd. 1997. Inherent Aboriginal rights in theory and practice: The Council for
Yukon Indians Umbrella Final Agreement. PhD Dissertation. Edmonton, AB: University of

Alberta.
McCullough, Lesley. 2006. Director of research for YT land claims secretariat. Personal
interview. Whitehorse, YT, October 24.
McLean, Ernest. 2001. Speaking notes for minister of Labrador and Aboriginal Affairs Ernest

McLean to the meeting of Newfoundland and Labrador RED boards. Happy Valley Goose
Bay, NL, October 12. Available at: http://www.releases.gov.nl.ca.

McMillan, Liard. 2006. Liard First Nation chief. Personal interview. Watson Lake, YT,

November 1.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada 367

McPherson, Robert. 2003. New owners: Minerals and Inuit land claims in their own land.
Calgary: University of Calgary Press.

Michel, Ben. 2006. Former Innu negotiator for Sheshatshiu and current Innu Nation
president. Telephone interview. Sheshatshiu, Labrador, January 24.
Miller, J. R. 2000. Skyscrapers hide the heavens: A history of Indian-White relations in Canada.

Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Mitander, Victor. 2006. Former Council of Yukon Indians negotiator on the Umbrella Final
Agreement. Personal interview. Whitehorse, YT, October 23.
Mitchell, Marybelle. 1996. From talking chiefs to a native corporate elite: The birth of class

and nationalism among Canadian Inuit. Montreal-Kingston: McGill-Queen's University

Press.

Molloy, Tom. 2000. The world is our witness: The historic journey of the Nisga'a into Canada.

Calgary: Fifth House Publishers.
Monture-Angus, Patricia. 1999. Journeying forward: Dreaming First Nations' independence.

Peterborough, ON: Fernwood Press.

Munck, Gerardo. 1994. Democratic transitions in comparative perspective. Comparative
Politics 26 (3): 355-375.
Murphy, Michael, (ed.). 2005. Relational self-determination and federal reform. Canada
and the State of the federation: 2005, Montreal-Kingston: McGill-Queens University

Press.

Nadasdy, Paul. 2003. Hunters and bureaucrats: Power, knowledge, and Aboriginal-State
relations in the Southwest Yukon. Vancouver, ON: UBC Press.
North, Douglass. 1990. Institutions, institutional change and economic performance. New York:

Cambridge University Press.

Nui, Mark. 2006. Current Innu Nation negotiator representing Natuashish. Personal
interview. Natuashish, Labrador, February 17.

Nuke, Ponus. 2006. Innu elder. Personal interview. Sheshatshiu, LB, February 15.

O'Brien, Rick. 2006. Bios - Rick O'Brien chief, Kwanlin D?n First Nation" Kwanlin D?n
First Nation Website. Website at: http://www.kwanlinDun.com (accessed February 15,

2007).

Pelley, Bob. 2006. Senior provincial negotiator for the Innu file. Personal interview.
St John's, Newfoundland, February 27.

Penikett, Tony. 2006. Reconciliation: First Nations treaty making in British Columbia.
Vancouver, BC: Douglas 8c McArthur.
Porter, Dave. 2006. Kaska Chief negotiator. Personal interview. Vancouver, BC, October 17.

Raybould, Tim. 2007. Just who needs treaties? Globe and Mail. (April 4): Letters to the
editor.
Rich, Paul. 2006. Former Innu Chief of Sheshatshiu. Personal interview. Happy Valley-Goose

Bay, Labrador, February 16.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

368 C. Alcantara

Riche, Joseph. 2006. Current Innu negotiator for Sheshatshiu. Personal interview.
Sheshatshiu, Labrador, February 13.

Rideout, Tom. 2004. Minister reflects on issues facing Labrador and Aboriginal people.

News Releases: NLIS 4, Labrador and Aboriginal Affairs, August 24. Available at:
http://www.releases.gov.nl.ca (accessed April 10, 2006).

Rowell, Judy. 2006. LIA negotiator. Telephone interview. Nain, Labrador, March 6.

Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (RCAP). 1996. Report of the royal commission on
Aboriginal Peoples. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services Canada.
Rueschemeyer, D., John Stephens, and Evelyn Huber Stephens. 1992. Capitalist development
and democracy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Russell, Dan. 2000. A people's dream: Aboriginal self-government in Canada. Vancouver, ON:

UBC Press.

Rynard, Paul. 2001. Ally or colonizer? The federal state, the Cree Nation, and the James Bay

agreement. Journal of Canadian Studies 36 (2): 8-47.

Rynard, Paul. 2000. Welcome in, but check your rights at the door: The James Bay and
Nisga'a agreements in Canada. Canadian Journal of Political Science 33 (2): 211-243.
Saku, James C, and Robert M. Bone. 2000. Looking for solutions in the Canadian North:
Modern treaties as a new strategy. The Canadian Geographer 44 (3): 259-270.
Samson, Colin. 2003. A way of life that does not exist: Canada and the extinguishment of the

Innu. St. John's, NL: Institute of Social and Economic Research.
Samson, C, James Wilson, and Jonathan Mazower. (1999). Canada's Tibet: The killing of the
Innu. Toronto, ON: Survival International.

Sand, Peter. 1999. Transnational environmental law, lessons in global change. Amsterdam,
Holland: Wolters Kluwer.
Scholtz, Christa. 2006. Negotiating claims: The emergence of indigenous land claim negotiation

policies in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States. New York: Routledge.

Serson, Scott. 2006. Former Deputy Minister of INAC. Telephone interview. Ottawa,
Ontario, March 24.
Shafto, Penny. 2006. Former senior federal negotiator for the Inuit file. Telephone interview.

Ottawa, Ontario, March 23.
Shapiro, Ian, and Donald Green. 1996. Pathologies of rational choice theory: A critique of
applications in political science. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Specific Claims Branch of Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. 2006. Public information
status report. Ottawa: Specific Claims Branch.

Sterriah, Norman. 2006. Former Ross River Dena Council chief and land negotiator.
Personal interview. Ross River, YT, October 30.
Tully, James. 2001. Reconsidering the B.C. treaty process. Speaking truth to power: A treaty

forum. Ottawa: Law Commission of Canada.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Peoples and CLC Negotiations in Canada 369

Wadden, Marie. 1991. Nitassinan: The Innu struggle to reclaim their homeland. Toronto:
Douglas 8c Mclntyre.
Walsh, Steve. 2006. Legal counsel to the Kaska Nation. Personal interview. Whitehorse, YT,

October 22.

White, Graham. 2002. Treaty federalism in northern Canada: Aboriginal-government land
claims boards. Publius: The Journal of Federalism 32 (3): 89-114.
Wilkins, David E. 2002. American Indian politics and the American political system. Lanham,

MD: Rowman 8c Littlefield.

Woolford, Andrew. 2005. Between justice and certainty: Treaty-making in modern-day British

Columbia. Vancouver, ON: UBC Press.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:59:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


