---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept
Author(s): BRUCE MORITO
Source: Journal of Applied Philosophy , 1996, Vol. 13, No. 2 (1996), pp. 123-139
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24354297
REFERENCES
Aboriginal Right:
A Conciliatory Concept

BRUCE MORITO

abstract The confusion that persists over Aboriginal claim in North America calls

examination. The paper begins by sorting out various versions of'Aboriginal right' and som

main factors that govern its use. Confusion is analysed as the result of conflating different

reference which determine different sets of expectations by Aboriginal and government
tatives.
To appreciate the significance of this conflation, it is helpful if not necessary to view the move to use

the concept 'Aboriginal right' as a strategic rather than a legally substantive one. Understanding
the move in this way helps to explain why it is that definitions remain elusive. The effect of using the

concept has indeed been to enable Aboriginals finally and effectively to table their claim. However,

the strategy has its cost. Using the language of the courts places Aboriginal negotiators at a
disadvantage, since that language is ineluctably tied to European social and legal sensibilities that
militate against understanding Aboriginal claim.

If, in the end, we understand that the move to use the language of the courts has been
conciliatory, we can better recognise the nature of Aboriginal claim. We can begin to understand
that it involves a complex web of responsibilities and commitments, most of which have either been
forgotten or perverted to suit government agendas. We can begin to see that it has to do with restoring

a relationship of mutual respect and protection.

The attempt to resolve conflicts and overcome the impasses encountered in negotiations
between North American Aboriginal peoples and governments has acquired a peculiarity;
the negotiation process seems simultaneously to suit and to misrepresent the nature of the
conflict. Initial observations suggest that government and Aboriginal representatives alike
are engaged in bargaining ploys. Both seem to be posturing and entrenching positions in the
anticipation of negotiated compromise. Using the language of the courts has had much to do
with generating the assumption that Aboriginal claim can and is to be recognized according
to a negotiation conflict-resolution process. The right to self-determination, the right to
self-government, the right to restoration of a land base all suggest that negotiations are being

played out on the same field as are labour-management disputes. Each side seems to want a
fair share of a commonly valued item, such as land, profit, security conditions.

But not all Aboriginal peoples want their rights recognised in the same way as those who
are demanding a place on the negotiation platform (e.g., many elders and hereditary or
traditional chiefs). Throughout North America, native populations are split between
supporters of more traditional ways and those who are prepared to negotiate legal, political,

and economic divisions of power. The band council system of government, for example,

while recognized by the Canadian government [1], is rejected in some Aboriginal

© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996, Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 1JF, UK and 3 Cambridge

Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

124 B. Morito

communities. Consequently, it is difficult, not only to know which body repres

Aboriginal claim, but to know to what that claim and its corresponding right am

I will attempt to sort out and analyse the use of rights language in Aboriginal

order to clarify the significance of its use. Once sorted out, the variety of uses of '

right' can be analysed as having a common basis in the experience of injustice. My

focus will be on the moral significance, rather than meaning or definition of the te

as will soon become evident, the meaning of Aboriginal right is unclear and cont

hope, therefore to suggest a possible re-formulation of Aboriginal claim through th

emphasis. I am not reformulating Aboriginal claim in order to get it right, so to

simply to shed new light on the issue, in the interest of overcoming som
misunderstanding and seemingly deliberate misconceptions of the claim.

Accordingly, coming to use rights language by Aboriginals can be understood as

conciliatory move. Caution, however, must be exercised here. I am not say
Aboriginal peoples have been prepared to compromise their autonomy, cu

aspirations, that is, the substance of their claim. They have, nevertheless, been c

by virtue of the fact that adopting the language of the courts creates a disadvan
attempting to articulate their claim.

One final cautionary note seems appropriate at this time. So divergent are the
and European-based political-legal perspectives that some have recommended s
systems of justice [2], I do not, therefore, write with the presumption of havin
insight into the Aboriginal perspective. My argument, despite utilizing statem

Aboriginal persons, rests entirely on the European moral sensibilities. All

understanding Aboriginal claim are, therefore, to be qualified as claims to an und

based on what has been (or can be) cross-culturally established as common
reference.

Sorting Out The Use of'Aboriginal Right' and Its Meanings

The adoption of terms such as 'right' and 'justice' has provided a platform
negotiations with Aboriginals have appeared to advance while confusion feste
Conn [3] of the Assembly of First Nations, among others, has noted that the
corresponding concept for 'right' in the Ojibwa language. This lack of a corre

concept seems fairly common among the tribes in North America [4]. Consequen

the term 'right' may in fact pervert Aboriginal claim. If the language does not

translation of'right' or even 'justice', 'Aboriginal right', if defined in terms of th

legal/political framework, cannot be an accurate representation of Aborigina

principles and practice.
This conceptual difficulty warns that the meaning of rights language is likel

disclosure. Most of us are by now familiar with statements of the sort, '

understand what it would mean to own the land,' [5] 'The land and the Cree are on

the Nishnawbe-Aski), [6] or, 'When I see the land being torn up, I feel like my o

being torn.' [7] Ownership and development of the land can itself be seen as un

Aboriginal. In the mouth of a European, whose sensibilities are in line with t
liberalism, such statements might be perceived as nonsense. They tend to be d
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 125
romantic rhetoric when brought to bear on European-based legal systems; those who make
the statements have been seen as immature, perhaps even savage simpletons [8]. The frame
of reference required for understanding Aboriginal claim seems so different from that of the

legal/political status quo that communication of the claim appears impossible.
Historically, Canada has explicitly announced as much. Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau

initially rejected Indian land claims and demands for redress, because he understood
statements about Aboriginal title and relations to the land to be fuzzy and devoid of

substance. His recommendation (Aug. 8, 1969, Vancouver B.C.) was to have Indians
accept full Canadian status and to be accorded the rights all Canadians enjoy, not special
status or distinctive 'Aboriginal' rights [9]. Admittedly, after Justice Thomas Berger
submitted his report on the treatment of Aboriginal peoples [10], Trudeau acknowledged
that he had been wrong in asserting that Aboriginal claims were hopelessly couched in
shadowy language. He concluded that negotiation between Aboriginals and the Govern
ment of Canada must take place: hence, the entrenchment of Aboriginal rights in the
Constitution Act of 1982 [ 11 ]. Since then, Canada has officially recognized Aboriginal claim

as distinctive and substantive. Trudeau's shift, however, illustrates a programmatic change
in North American attitudes, whereas the recognition of the distinctive substance of
Aboriginal claim has yet to be established.

We can also grant that, in some cases, e.g., the Navajo in the United States, 'Aboriginal
right' seems clearly formulated. The Navajo have achieved limited political, economic, and
legal jurisdiction over an area of land. They have their own police force and judicial system.

But not all Aboriginal claimants are calling for the same manifestation of the right to self
government. Indeed, not all within the Navajo system itself agree with the system, since
many on the reservation remain committed to traditional forms of government.

Similarly, in the Canadian context, deceptively clear formulations have arisen. Elijah
Harper has been quoted as saying that the only thing Aboriginal peoples want is to be
accorded the same rights and treatment as any other Canadian [12]. Herb George of the
Gitskan-Wet'suwet'en tribe has declared that he wants jurisdictional powers similar to those
of the Federal and provincial governments. Neil Sterrit, negotiator for the Assembly of First
Nations, explains that sovereignty is the freedom to take responsibility for decisions within
one's own territories. 'Sovereignty' refers to a degree of authority and responsibility within
these territories. Despite the apparent clarity in the claims of these representatives, their
pronouncements have the ring of political preamble.
From the Canadian North through to the American West, we find that at the heart of

many if not most Aboriginal claims lies a different sense of justice than has been
accommodated by the European-based legal systems. For example, unlike typical land
claims in North America, where exclusionary ownership and bounded properties define the
land claim, Aboriginals often reject such definitions (e.g., the Cree have quite explicitly
described the incompatibility of claims in this way). Gary Potts (Chief of the Teme Augama

Anishnawbe Aski) has gone as far as to say that the land claim requires that Aboriginal
peoples teach others how to steward the land. Many among the Cree and Ojibwa in Ontario
and Quebec, not to mention the Inuit of the North and Innu of Labrador, do not want the
Navajo solution to be treated as the paradigm case for Aboriginal land claim settlement. The
fact that the implications of a so-called land-claim are so different from what we would

normally expect should lead us to worry about expecting readily formulable definitions of
sovereignty and land claim.

The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples [13] similarly expresses a need for a
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

126 B. Morito

different approach to justice issues for Aboriginal peoples. One presenter, Ja
[14], describes the differences in the notions of sovereignty, morality, comm

values as they pertain to an understanding of justice. Without understanding t

frame of reference or world view, it is impossible to do justice to the Aborigina

argues. When we understand the community orientation, for instance, we ca

why it is that justice is not for the individual as such. It is for the individual-in

Achieving justice in situations of conflict or deviance was 'restoring t

equilibrium within the community and reconciling the accused with his-her c
with the individual or family that was wronged.' [15]

Dumont's point turns on peculiar uses of the term 'justice' and 'individual'.
hand, his use is unfamiliar inasmuch as he asserts that the Aboriginal senses

person have not yet been recognized by Canadian authorities. On the other ha

familiar to the extent that we can acknowledge that this lack of recognition is i

While I am not about to undertake the task of sorting out these senses or levels

make note of the difficulty that many Aboriginal representatives have in form

concept of justice. Likewise, with the concept of the individual, we ar

acknowledge that the Aboriginal sense of being a person is distinct from and pe

to European concepts.
Coming to understand these different senses or concepts can perhaps fru
approached by examining how differently they operate in the two traditi

tradition, reconciliation to community and self has more to do with matters
tion in the interest of charity or of establishing healthy social relationships, tha

While justice in the European system certainly need not exclude matters of r

the system is indifferent if not antagonistic toward the idea that a perpetrat

ought to be reconciled with himself as a matter of conscience, especially wh

offence has been committed. Although much of our correctional system i

directed by the principle of rehabilitation, the primary reasons we cite for inca

punishment, prevention and deterrence. All are designed to re-establish th
individual privacy and private property, versions of the non-interference
Reconciliation with oneself remains an odd and perhaps foreign notion, wher
privacy expectations dominate. Moreover, to expect a victim of a crime to

reconciliation for the perpetrator as central to justice would more likely be view

both by the victim and the legal system. From a victim's perspective, just
punishment, compensation or reparation of some sort for the victim, not h

perpetrator. Thus, neither from the system's nor the victim's point o
reconciliation expected.

So, while the language of sovereignty, jurisdiction, power and the like m
familiar and ring clearly, it is far from certain that its Aboriginal meaning is

meaning for government and the dominant society. If Dumont, traditiona
leaders and elders are correct, Aboriginal claim cannot be adequately articula
European-based legal tradition. Coupled with the fact that Aboriginal languag
support translations of European legal language, the need to articulate Abor
accordance with a unique frame of reference implies that imposing a Euro

system of justice is totalitarian in nature, even if not in intent. Certain heredi

their supporters have, in fact, rejected the European system outright, becau

and reductive. For example, they reject the imposed 'band council' sys

government has established to represent the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois of Sou
€) Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 127
and Northern New York State) as its negotiating team [16]. Some reject the officially

recognised National Assembly of First Nations (headed by Ovide Mercredi) as their
legitimate representative, because it, allegedly, does not represent the Native peoples as
native peoples. It accepts a reduction of claims and values to those acceptable to European
sensibilities.

Confusion over Aboriginal claim and the use of rights, as Dumont suggests, is due to
persisting differences at the level of cosmology and metaphysical commitments [17]. At this

level, commitments are radically different. Dominant European metaphysical commit
ments deny claims that humans are inseparable from the land. It is not only taken to be a
foreign, but a morally perverted idea. The European, under the influences of Locke, among

others (Aquinas, Descartes, Kant), assumes that a radical axiological separation exists
between the human agent and nature [18]. Humanity is in a place of privilege to use and

exploit an otherwise wasted land. Two and a half millennia of entrenching the idea of
superiority from Greek philosophy to Christianity, furthermore, have made the dominant
Western political body see itself as distinct from nature by virtue of its rationality.
Rationality constitutes a difference in kind and in value (intrinsic versus instrumental) from

the land. Despite a great deal of work in European-based philosophy designed to undermine

these commitments, they nevertheless persist, not only in common opinion, but within

professional academic circles as well [19]. The view that oneness with the land (a
metaphysical and moral holism) is to be treated as a primary concept, moreover, has often
been denounced for its support of fascism and totalitarianism [20].

Moreover, America's celestially grounded Manifest Destiny to subdue and expand into
the North American continent (if not the world) proceeded to the destruction of the North
American Indian as both an economic right and a moral duty. This, coupled with the
Christian mission of converting the heathen, demonstrated that it was all but impossible for
the American/European to recognise Aboriginal culture as a viable frame of reference for the

legal system. Historical inertia, as embodied in legal and political tradition, then, further
entrenches the antagonism toward Aboriginal metaphysics. North America's heroes are
those who conquered and tamed a wild land, not those who found harmony with it. This
rejection of Aboriginal claim and perspective demonstrates how wide the gap is between
traditional Aboriginal leadership and government. It explains why the use of 'Aboriginal
right' diverges so dramatically from expectation.

Epistemological and methodological commitments also play an important role in
explaining why government has not moved very much to form a univocal meaning for the
concept. The vision quest [21] which is governed by a spiritual understanding of how the
land and animals communicate with human beings, is either ignored or at best treated as an

idiosyncratic and entertaining peculiarity within our epistemological traditions. More
often, however, such notions of knowledge are treated as laughable. Perhaps the best way to

illustrate our attitudes on such matters is through a dramatic representation.

On a Canadian Broadcasting Corporation production, North of Sixty, a modern Dene
community in the Canadian North is portrayed as struggling with its Aboriginal history and

European-influenced aspirations. The community is served by both white and native Royal

Canadian Mounted Police officers, a white band manager, and white shop-keeper. In one
episode, the justice system allows the Dene to exercise their form of justice in dealing with a

member who had committed a criminal offence. That system involved a sentencing circle,
during which the perpetrator was required to sit in a room surrounded by silent members
(elders) of the community. While this session was taking place, there was a transition to a
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

128 B. Morito

scene in which three of the white males, who were not allowed into the circle, m

cafeteria. They began discussing what might be transpiring in the circle, which w

the better part of the day. The RCMP officer in a half-joking, half-cynica
remarked, 'They're not going to sentence him; they're going to heal him.' With

three broke into a giddy laughter which gave way to nervous laughter and ended in

That scene captured more deeply why it is next to impossible to unders

Aboriginal frame of reference. On one plane, we find such justice-cum-healing u
ible or perhaps a misunderstanding of what justice actually is. On another plane,

laughable, as if perpetrators can evade true justice in such a 'soft' system. On yet

the nervous animosity associated with the laughter and which eventually yields
indicates a profound discomfort. A discomfort that engenders silence is produce

we are unable intelligently to participate in the processes that we are encounteri
feel that we ought to be able to participate and pass judgment. I stress the element

here, because, while lack of understanding has to do with conceptual difficult
equally to do with emotional reactions.

Our inability to understand Aboriginal claim involves feelings of offence. A
approaches, as in the vision quest and in the sentencing circle, are by definition

and idiosyncratic [22]. We not only tend to think of these latter modes of know
primitive and undeveloped, we also tend to carry an attitude of disdain toward t

their examination were unworthy of a dignified, self-respecting inquirer. Sim

Aboriginal justice, as a healing-cum-reconciliation process, not only seems to allo

breaking of law, but it tends to offend our moral sensibilities, because it appear

perpetrator is 'getting away' with the crime. Resistance to Aboriginal claim has inti

do with our own primitive moral and emotional reactions.

Walter Berns [23] argues that anger unites people and strengthens the bonds o
that exist between them, when threatened by those who would do them injury.

perhaps fear], when tamed and educated through the forming of laws and pr
grounds systems of justice (especially criminal). Concepts of justice, as they p
security, protection, freedom and self-esteem are supported and perhaps gen

fundamental passions. The insight on which I wish to focus here is this:

community experiences and shares an anger or passion as a response to injury or

is next to impossible to understand how that community could become knit a
community united under law. Berns demonstrates that our laws, especially th
rounding matters of crime and fundamental justice (matters having to do with
freedom and dignity) are grounded in primitive passions that underlie our norm

related, metaphysical/epistemological commitments. This is the level at

personally and sometimes socially either include or exclude someone from th
community.
Considering the influence of more traditional leadership, the metaphysical underpinnings

of cultural and epistemological resistance, and the confusion over the use of 'right' by
Aboriginals can be described as unavoidable. The dispute over definition may then be
irresolvable. Taking historical and cultural contexts into account alone make the meaning of
'right' opaque. If we add the epistemological resistance to the mix, that opacity becomes
more dense. With emotional factors, metaphysical and epistemological resistance becomes
associated with feelings of offence. Assigning a meaning to 'Aboriginal right' is so difficult,
in part, because of volitional factors, our unwillingness to overcome emotional predisposi
tions.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 129

The History and Use of Legal Language
What is striking, given the European dominance over the Aboriginal, is that there has been
any advance in Aboriginal claims such that we could have arrived at the stage of conflict in

negotiations at all. Indeed, we know in Canadian history, religious and philosophical
underpinnings of Aboriginal culture were the targets of eradication. The banning of the
Sundance, potlatch, use of native language, and use of ceremonial (narcotic) substances are
cases in point. We have a long history of explicitly and implicitly denying the grounding
values of Aboriginal culture. More than sufficient emotional and institutional momentum,
then, has existed in North America to prevent negotiations based on Aboriginal rights from
being initiated at all. Nevertheless, negotiations have begun and have come a considerable
distance. An important factor in advancing Aboriginal claim to the level of the courts and in

avoiding complete deadlock has been the fact that Aboriginals and the government are
beginning to use common terms of reference. These terms are those of traditional European

political and legal systems; movement has been the result of native leaders becoming versed
in the language of the courts.
The language of Aboriginal right, sovereignty, the inherent right to self-government, and
of land claim, unlike the fuzzy texture of statements which assert a oneness and identity with

the land, are familiar. Aboriginals have adopted the role of plaintiff and have put the matter
of justice in terms of redress and failure to honour agreements (contracts or treaties). Having

been placed in the role of defendant, the Canadian public and government now see
themselves as having something to lose. To articulate claims in the language of the courts,
therefore, is to pose a threat to property rights and political stability. Thus, by using the
language of the courts, Aboriginal claims have become more effective.

Paradoxically, while Aboriginal's use of European-based moral and legal language has
served to advance their claim, it has also produced the confusion previously described. Since
we know that the term 'right' is foreign to the Aboriginal when Ovide Mercredi tells us that

' "Inherent right" can mean whatever we want it to mean'[24], we immediately suspect him
of committing some serious error in understanding the concept. Further, in Canada, the
Aboriginal demand that the inherent right to self-government be recognised in the
Constitution, without first being defined [25], amply indicates that the concept of right and
its associated concepts, 'justice,' 'fairness,' 'title,' etc. imply different sets of consequences
for Aboriginals than for other Canadians. Thus, even some of those who appear to have
adopted the European model of justice and who are criticized by hereditary leaders seem to
conflate and confuse traditional frames of reference with European ones.
Moreover, Winona Stevenson has told us that 'inherent' in 'inherent right' refers to

something that comes from within as the source of self-government [26]. For Aboriginals,
there seems to be an internal relation between 'right' and 'individual will.' There is no

disconnection between knowing what one must do to govern properly and one's will.

Putting aside the equivocation on the use of 'inherent right' [27], it is obvious that
Aboriginals are claiming that a type of relationship between the individual and the
governing power, unfamiliar to our political and legal expectations, needs to be recognised.
We are being asked to recognise the idea that to be governed is to be able to acknowledge
the truth and trustworthiness of a decision. For the Aboriginal, that trustworthiness can be

embodied in a leader, e.g., a chief, elder, or clan mother, where that leader is a decision
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

130 B. Morito

maker recognised as expressing the will and spirit of each member of the com
chief does not enforce rights so much as serve as the focus through which rig

exercised. According to Dumont, this means that 'self-interest was [is]

intertwined with the tribal interest, that is, the general good and the individu

[are to be] taken to be virtually identical.' [28]. If there is to be constraint

practised in the community, an internal motivation is to be sought as the 'for
the action.

One may be tempted to argue that the apparent advance in negotiations has been nothing
more than an exercise in futility. Native peoples' use of legal language has been naive and

confused. Like the early Trudeau, many (e.g., the Reform Party) in Canada believe that
Native peoples must accept compensation for the past and realise that reference to historical

tradition is nothing but counter-productive and confused.
However, Aboriginal negotiators and representatives are far from legally and politically

naive and are unlikely to be confused. Ovide Mercredi, among others (e.g., Mark
Dockstater, Osgoode Law School, Ph.D candidate; Patricia A. Monture-Okanee, Univer
sity of Ottawa, Faculty of Common Law; Mary Ellen Turpel, Dalhousie University), is
trained in the legal profession. Technical legal expertise has come on the scene in force (e.g.,
Justice Thomas Berger's report, Northern Frontier, Northern Homeland; Bruce Clark's book,

Native Liberty, Crown Sovereignty [29]. An increasing number of lobby groups working
from within the legal system to support Aboriginal claim are also under way. Clark's book

has likewise challenged the letter of the law on matters concerning treaties and the law
concerning Aboriginal peoples. With all of this legal machinery continually forcing the
message that Canada (and the United States) has acted unjustly, it is implausible to conclude
that Aboriginal claim is naive and confused.
It is perhaps best to view the present situation as follows: with the legal machinery in
place, an ironic situation has arisen. While the machinery is used to bring the issue of justice

for Aboriginals before the legal system, it is at the same time denounced as inadequate to
address Aboriginal claim. Evidence for this conclusion is Section 35 of the Constitution Act
1982. It specifically recognises Aboriginal rights. At the same time, these rights are being
used to argue that the system in which they are recognised is inadequate to define them.
Coming to use legal language, does not appear to be the result of confusion, but of a strategic
move to use the legal system to overcome barriers to communication. The use of legal
language is, for the most part, not substantive, in the sense that it indicates acceptance of
terms on which negotiation is to proceed. A closer look at the historical context of Aboriginal
claim further supports this 'strategy' interpretation.
The history of injustice involves the destruction of traditional forms of government, the
relocating of entire communities and the banning of traditional religious practices essential

to the culture by Canadian and American authorities. Aboriginal claim is connected to the
loss of a way of life, an environment (more precisely, a sense of place) and an identity as
individuals and as communities. Lloyd Barber (former federal land claims negotiator) has
sugested that justice requires empowering natives to live in a manner similar to the time
before Europeans came to North America [30]. Clearly, Barber recognises that the loss has
been a way of life. Berger's report to the Canadian government is filled with warnings that
Canada must be aware of the fact that development of the North will mean the destruction
not only of tangible items such as wildlife and clean water, but of intangible items such as a
way of life and cultural values that are tied to the land. He goes as far as to cite Chief Justice

John Marshall of U.S. Supreme court (1823) to make his point: European arrogance and
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 131

imposition of 'civilisation' and 'religion' have been a major force in disenfranchising
Aboriginal peoples from just dealings [31]. Hence, an explicit recognition of unjust
treatment defined as disenfranchisement from a way of life has existed within official circles
for many years.

Particularly helpful in the recognition of the order of injustice is a statement by Marlene
Castelano of Trent University: 'it [the inherent right to self-government] is the re-creating of

trust relationships that we once had.' This trust, as the Royal Proclamation of 1763 [32]
implies, is between nations, sovereign nations, whose autonomy is to be respected and
protected under law. King George Ill's Proclamation was intended to protect Aboriginal
peoples from undue exploitation by ensuring that fair settlements over land claims and
ceding of land west of the Appalachians (all land west of the Atlantic watershed) could be
done only through representatives of the Crown. History is all too clear on the fact that few

European settlements since the Proclamation were actually established through legitimate
channels. What has been lost through unjust treatment, then, is a matter of both cultural
and inter-cultural integrity. Castelano's statement is critical, because it expresses a truth

that has been largely ignored in debates over Aboriginal rights. For the most part,
negotiations have to do with rights to territories, self-government, resource rights and the

like. These rights tend to separate and isolate Aboriginal and European communities in such

a way as to cause negotiations to take the form of dividing jurisdictions, powers, and
resources. But buried within these disputes is the more fundamental issue of inter-cultural
well-being and the lack of respect that has been paid to agreements that have been designed
to protect the integrity of the web of cultures.

While Barber's formulation is programmatically helpful in aiding us to see how
comprehensive in scope the injustice to Aboriginal peoples has been, Castelano's
formulation is more substantive, since it targets the relationship between Aboriginal and
European civilizations. At the time of the Proclamation, this relationship was clearly
formulated as one between sovereign nations. The sense of injustice and what has been lost,
consequently, can be articulated in terms of the relation between the two parties, and does

not rely entirely on our having to understand the Aboriginal perspective. The order of
injustice has to do with fiduciary relationships that mutually protected the well-being of
diverse societies, relationships built on honour and law. Historically, Aboriginal claim has
had principally to do with sovereignty and autonomy (self-determination) within the
relationship between Aboriginal and European nations.
To what did this relationship amount? If we note that the meaning of 'treaty' has to do
with agreements in order to maintain peace, a peace which both sides are to enjoy, at the very

least, the relationship between Aboriginal and government involved a degree of mutual
respect. At the time of the Proclamation of 1763, both parties agreed to peaceful co
existence and the rule of law. Without the agreement neither side could have had its way of
life guaranteed, since a perpetual threat of war would have prevailed. According to Berger
[33], the Proclamation was formed after the seven year war with the French to ensure that
the Iroquois would not side with the French. Both the British and the French vied for
alliances with the Iroquois, Micmacs and the Huron as they waged battle with each other.
Even if only for reasons of expediency, the relationship between Aboriginal groups and
Europeans has been understood to be one of mutual respect for sovereign peoples. Treaties,
like the Proclamation, in principle, respect the conditions of honour and dignity of the
signatories. They are not mere contracts, moreover, but agreements based on the mutual
recognition of the power each signatory possesses.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

132 B. Morito

Since from the time of Trudeau's pronouncement governments have not denied
that treaties and agreements have been broken, there is no issue to be sorted out

now is to determine the significance of having been the victims of broken agreem

significance cannot be determined solely by the law, for in fact the legitimacy of som

treaties and laws has been rejected (evidence to follow in the next section). What

focus on, if we are to take Aboriginal rights as distinctive, is what it signifies for A

to have been denied autonomy, the sort of self-rule compatible with a web of
Having virtually dismissed sovereignty agreements, our governments have allo
destruction of a people, their corresponding sense of freedom and self-esteem. If
less on what has happened to Aboriginal peoples and more on what we have done
readily intelligible context for understanding the implications for just dealing
established.

Even if we claim not to understand the grounding values and passions of the Aboriginal
peoples, we cannot fail to understand what disenfranchising a signatory, a community, and
a nation means for us as moral agents. These are acts of commission, not merely omission.

We cannot explain away our actions as oversights or the results of unavoidable confusion
over the meaning of Aboriginal claim. Once we adopt this point of view as perpetrators of

injustice, we can clearly understand the nature of the injustice under question. It includes
arbitrarily, deliberately and maliciously excluding Aboriginal peoples from the moral
community to which they originally belonged.

It is impossible to claim that the perpetrators of injustice did not know that they were
excluding Aboriginal peoples from the moral community. More empirical evidence for this
claim will be examined in the following section. For the moment, it is sufficient to note that
the significance of 'Aboriginal right' is determined by their disenfranchisement. In the final
analysis, it is used to repudiate the system of justice that has engineered their exclusion from

the moral community. This right is not something yet to be established, but to be
recognised. Thus, definitional difficulties are to some extent irrelevant, when determining
significance. 'Aboriginal right' operates more to announce a claim rather than form the
substance of that claim. Such being the case, the move to use rights language is best seen as a

strategic move to communicate in an effective manner. I submit that the underlying
motivation for the move is the recognition that governments have indeed had the capacity to

understand their claim, but have chosen not to understand.

Rights as Conciliatory
I turn now to the question, 'What kind of move is the move to use "Aboriginal" right?' If the

move is conciliatory, it must be shown that Aboriginal peoples lose something by adopting
the language. What they lose is the likelihood of negotiating on a level playing field and of
having their claims adequately represented. The history of injustice can once again serve as a
springboard. I begin with a sketch of some of the main conditions of cultural autonomy that
have been denied Aboriginal peoples, in order to provide the background against which the
move can be understood.

The land is the place in which an identity is born and nurtured. To have a spiritual
connection to the land is at minimum to have an identity relation with the land, where
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 133
identity is formulated in holistic terms. That is, identity implies that the Aboriginal person
takes him or herself to be an aspect of the land such that what the person is depends on what

the land is. In this way, Aboriginal persons would be incapable of adopting a system of
government and law that separates their identity as individuals from that of the land as a
living being.
Chief Seattle (or Sealth of the Duwamish tribe) is said to have expressed incredulity over
the idea that the land could be owned; exploiting the land, to him, would be like exploiting
ourselves (plural intended). Whether Sealth actually made this statement is not critical here.
The statement serves to capture what many other Aboriginal peoples have said about their
relation to the land and what their stories and myths are meant to teach [34]. What we are to

note when encountering the Aboriginal wisdom, myths, stories, and religion, is this: to be
an Ojibwa, a Cree, or Iroquois (Haudenosaunee) is to be an integral part of a particular land,
a relationship which is formed by an intricate web of mutually dependent members. It is to

understand community in a wide and pluralistic sense. It is to understand that one's dignity
is tied to the generosity, courage, and respect with which one treats and interacts with other

members of the community [35]. The loss of a land base is different for Aboriginals than
for Europeans. Nevertheless, it is tied to their sense of autonomy (self-determination). In
being denied the right to the land on which they and their ancestors lived and thrived, the
right to exercise their values and to fulfil their aspirations as persons and communities have
also been denied.

In relation to this denial, George Erasmus has said, 'What we want is self-reliance, self
control, internal growth (autonomy). We want to start a process of healing.' [36] Despite

seeming an odd way to formulate a claim, Erasmus makes it clear that part of being
disenfranchised has been to have the conditions necessary for personhood and community
identity (basic constituents of the autonomous being) denied or eradicated. Depriving
Aboriginals of a land base by moving them to reservations destroys the integrated network
of relationships that form the basis of autonomy. The form of deprivation taken, therefore,
was an injustice of the most fundamental order conceivable.
It is not beyond the capacity of the political and legal system to recognise these conditions

of autonomy, as Trudeau once thought. Notions of oneness with the land and healing,
granted, may be fuzzy and foreign. But the frame of reference to which they belong is not all

that fuzzy and foreign. The idea of justice as righting balances and restoring harmony in a
community is to be found in Plato. His theory of justice in Book IV of the Republic [37] takes

justice to be what makes the three essential qualities of a city (moderation, courage and
wisdom) first appear and then to remain in the city. Justice, here, is an ordering principle,
harmonising the three virtues as the city becomes vibrant and strong, characteristics closely
aligned with health. Moreover, as it is not itself clearly formulable, justice is something that
brings about the other virtues and the consequent harmony in the city, much like justice as a
process does in Aboriginal tradition.

This remark on Plato is meant to demonstrate that there has been little reason to be so
dismissive even of the more opaque elements of Aboriginal perspective. My earlier remark

on our having willed not to understand, as much as we have found that we cannot
understand the Aboriginal perspective, can now be modified. Our lack of will has been a
larger factor than our lack of cognitive devices in failing to recognise Aboriginal perspective.

Promising routes to the disclosure of the conditions of Aboriginal autonomy have wilfully
remained unexamined both politically and legally. Destruction of persons and communities
cannot, therefore, be explained as an unforeseeable consequence of denying a land base.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

134 B. Morito

Although not unforeseeable, it might be argued that it is beyond the responsi
governing powers to understand the implications of their actions, when those im

are determined by a foreign frame of reference. However, when addressing the c

members of the moral community, such argument is inadmissible. In a landmar

by the Supreme Court of Canada, 1988, Justice Bertha Wilson explained why th
law established in 1969 had to be abolished. She cites Neil MacCormick [38]: on
respect as a human being and the contentment that resides in the ability to pursue

conception of a full and rewarding life is foundational in a free and democratic s

ability to make autonomous decisions is vital to this pursuit. Thus, Wilson argues

to re-instate respect for the dignity and self-esteem of women, the paternalistic abo

which take the decision making power away from individual women must be
unconstitutional.

The treatment of Aboriginal peoples has violated the same fundamental values. The
phrase, 'one's conception of a full and rewarding life,' implies that the courts can and do

recognise that embracing a plurality of terms of reference when determining what
constitutes dignity and self-esteem is critical in a truly democratic society. The Wilson
decision called those who were alien to the experience of womanhood to recognise the
principle that, notwithstanding the inability to appreciate a woman's experience and
situation, the male members of society are to accept women's conditions of autonomy,
dignity and self-esteem. It is incumbent on those in positions of power in a liberal society to

recognise distinctive situations, despite the fact that such recognition conflicts with basic
moral sensibilities, such as those pertaining to the status of the fetus. The Supreme Court

decision implies that, when the claimant's injury involves matters of dignity and self
esteem, his or her injury must be addressed in accordance with those terms of reference,
even though the decision-makers may lack an understanding of the terms. When we can
demonstrate that dignity and self-esteem have been lost or denied as the result of some
system or practice of the dominant society, it is incumbent on that society to recognise the
need to change its systems and practices in order to establish suitable conditions.

If there has, in principle, been room in the liberal European tradition for acknowledging
some elements of Aboriginal perspective and culture, and more poignantly, for making

pursuit of understanding the conditions of Aboriginal autonomy a responsibility, then
Aboriginal peoples would be justified in expecting the political and legal systems to have
protected those conditions of autonomy. They would be justified in standing firm on the
claim that it is incumbent on the government to acknowledge the Aboriginal terms of
reference. If so, then the government would also be responsible for facilitating the
development of a mutually satisfying framework of justice before negotiation could
proceed.

Indeed, at points early in the developing relationship between the European and
Aboriginal nations, a mutually recognised sense of justice governed the relationship.
Despite their differing elements, the two approaches to justice shared fundamental values
and principles, as reflected in the Proclamation. What the following describes, therefore, is
a belligerent denial of this common ground and a once recognised responsibility. (It also
serves as evidence for the view that disenfranchisement was the product of deliberate acts of

exclusion.)
As an elder of the Nishnawbe-Aski [39] has described, many treaties were enacted by a
mere show of hands or 'X's' on pieces of paper. But, those treaties meant fundamentally
different things to the Crown and to the Cree/Ojibwa of Hudson Bay, for example. The
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 135
representatives of the Crown are said to have announced that the Queen wanted all of them
(the Cree and the Ojibwa) to be her children. She did not want their islands, their fish and

water; she wanted only ten inches of top soil. For the Cree and Ojibwa, whose tradition
found ownership a foreign idea, it could not be foreseen that the Queen meant that they
would be ceding the land to her. Indeed, if Dumont's account of the Aboriginal world view
is correct, sharing [40] is an essential value whose manifestations in attitudes and principles

of social conduct excludes any notion of property. Hence, treaty 'signing' was advan
tageous to the government in the sense that the playing field on which negotiations were to

be played out was that which the government had designed. Imposing European-based legal

procedure onto negotiations and treaty signings was itself a denial of the common ground
that existed between the nations. Such imposition was an act of substituting the legal process

recognised by only one party for a process that should have been mutually constructed.

Treaty signing was, as a result, in many instances, a misrepresentation of Aboriginal
claim, because Aboriginal signatories would not have agreed to sign had they understood the

consequences of signing. From the point of view of the government such treaties were in

effect expressions of a dismissive attitude toward Aboriginal procedures for reaching

agreement, since little concern for representing their perspective was shown. Legal
procedure was devised as a means for gaining an advantage over the Aboriginal, not for
achieving just relations.
Outright contempt for Aboriginal peoples has been demonstrated throughout the history
of European occupation of North America. The intention of the Canadian government has

been to use whatever means was necessary to acquire lands from Aboriginal peoples. The
following instructions to the Lieutenant-governor of Northwest T erritories after the cession
of Rupert's land are particularly noteworthy: "Turn attention promptly toward North and

West assuring Indians of your desire to establish friendly relations with them, you will
ascertain and report to His Excellency the course you may think most advisable to pursue,
whether by treaty or otherwise, for the removal of any obstructions that might be presented

to the flow of population into the fertile lands that lie between Manitoba and the Rocky
Mountains" [41]. Two observations can be made. First, a common ground in a sense of
justice must have prevailed at the time for the government to have anticipated using legal
devices to gain possession of the Prairies. Second, the legal machinery was not employed to
develop just relations but to exploit the common ground.

Similar contempt and condescension is illustrated in the Indian Act, which allows the

government to assume all responsibility for handling Indian moneys and deprives
Aboriginal communities of the responsibility for decision-making. Taking decision-making
responsibility away from Aboriginal peoples is tantamount to depriving the Aboriginal
person of the context in which self-esteem and dignity gain support. Both policy and
legislation demonstrate a contempt that led to the exclusion of Aboriginal peoples from the

protection and responsibilities of the moral community. What were virtual genocide
programmes followed. Taking native children from their parents and community to educate
them in the ways of a Christian world was in effect an officially sanctioned way of eliminating

a culture, a people. Dislocation and forced 'Catholic' residential schooling were the
government's ways of responding to its fear that native children, if allowed to return to their

communities, would slip back into savagery.

More devious routes were taken to exercise complete disregard: these took the form of

assimilation programmes. Assimilation programmes would appear initially to be a step
toward accepting Aboriginals as members of the community. This, however, turned out not
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

136 B. Morito

to be the case. A prime example is the assimilation programme of Alberta. It
that the Indian would have to become civilized and not be allowed to continue

hunting and nomadic life. He would have to be trained as a farmer. In Alber
many natives proved to be extremely good farmers. Settlers lobbied, as a res
'Indians'' productivity proclaimed unfair. Indians were to be put onto reser
(1888) Deputy Minister of Indian Affairs Haiter Reid, proclaimed that the
have to evolve from hunter to peasant and only then to modern man. He would

only with hand tools, not machinery. It became illegal for natives to borrow for

to kill their own livestock, or to sell their products of labour [42], Disaster
ensued. Rather than perceiving this outcome as a tragedy, it was seen as pr
Indians would never learn. A later rendition of this contempt is cited by Ge
[43]. In a House of Commons speech by Deputy Superintendent of Indian Aff

Campbell Scott, the House was told that 'Our object is to continue until there
Indian in Canada that has not been absorbed into the body politic, and there

question, and there is no Indian Department.' This, together with the resid
policy, demonstrates a clear disregard for the moral status of Aboriginals. It,

ignores this status by the fact that assimilation programmes are designed to
amoral savage.

The only way to interpret the actions of Canada and the United States is t
blatant denials of justice. The sanctioned deceitfulness of the early Indian
policies, the paternalism of the Indian Act, and the utter denial of the con
autonomy in the assimilation programmes signify far more than contempt f
communities. One can be contemptuous of persons without violating their a
privacy. One can simply leave them alone. The significance of contempt, in t
Canadian government, is that it created an atmosphere in which a blindness
developed and formalized into law. The government's use of law has been eith
Aboriginal people as Aboriginals, or to eliminate them, period.
What have the law and legal language been to the Aboriginal people, then

been the instruments of disenfranchisement. They have been the tool

governments have eradicated the conditions of autonomy. In the light of th
unjust use of the law, adopting the language of rights is best interpreted as

move. The move is conciliatory, because it gives the same advantage to the do
as was once forcibly and arbitrarily taken by that society. It runs the risk of h

machinery that once was used to deny justice, to do so once again. Mor

language does not immediately call for an examination of the morally outrag

against the community and culture. Rather, it calls for an examination of t
against law (i.e., against the formal legal institutions, the treaties). If the g
chooses, it could frustrate negotiations over the legal interpretations of th

being done in numerous cases) without acknowledging the more profound v
if it were to acknowledge the more profound violations, ones that place the leg
themselves in the dock, the government still retains the advantage, since suc
slowly to wind their way to the Supreme Court, which can refuse to hear the

adopting the legal language and its concomitant procedures predisposes negot

European legal and ethical sensibilities, which make it more difficult to f

Aboriginal claim in appropriate terms. By adopting the language of rights, it i

the full extent of the violation will be recognized or acted upon in the lega
system.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 137
But most importantly, Aboriginal peoples have come to use a system of concepts and
principles that have been instrumental in the destruction of their culture and identity. As a

strategic move to communicate, coming to use the language of the courts must be
understood to be an act of choosing to bear, without recognition, the humiliation and
despair that come from being denied moral status. Being conciliatory, in this respect, does
not so much signify an attitude of compromise but of magnanimity.

Conclusion

In contexts where conciliation by the disadvantaged group has led to systematic
misunderstanding of that group, a special dispensation of justice needs to be considered. We

should acknowledge that apart from the conciliatory move, Aboriginal claim would
probably still have not gained any purchase on the dominant community's sensibilities. We
should not ignore the conciliatory nature of present Aboriginal claim, for, if we understand

why it is conciliatory and how the conciliation developed, we cannot fail to recognise the
extent of the injustice that demands righting.

Bruce Morito, Department of Philosophy, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada NIG
2W1.
NOTES

[1] Minister of Supply and Services Canada (1993) Indian Act, R. S., 1985, c. 1-5, amended by R.S., 1985,
(1st Supp.) R.S., 1985,c. 17,43,48(4thSupp.), Sept. 1989, Sect 2(1) (c). A band council will be that d
by the Governor in Council for purposes of the Act.

The band council is a regional governing body constituted by band members. It, however, is not a traditi
form of government, but one imposed by the Canadian government.

[2] John Giokas (1992) How Can The Canadian Justice System Be Adapted To Accommodate The Conc

Aboriginal Peoples?, in The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, National Roundtable on Justice
November 25-27,1992, Vol. 1, Tab 4, p. 2.

[3] Keith Conn is the Co-ordinator of Environmental Issues for the Assembly of First Nations. In 1992,
meeting of the Canadian Society for the Study of Practical Ethics, he informed me of this matter.

corroborate this view of language. Patricia A. Monture-Okanee (1992) Reclaiming Justice: Abor
Women and Justice Initiatives in the 1990's, in the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, Na
Roundtable on Justice Issues, November 25-27, 1992, Vol. l,Tab 2,p. 36.

[4] Ibid., Monture-Okanee, p. 36 and in footnote 47. She cites Professor Leroy Littlebear (Blackfoot trib

the Native American Studies Department, University of Lethbridge: 'Justice is not a concept but a pr

The import of the remark seems to be that formal conceptualisation is the wrong approach to underst
Aboriginal traditions and practices. Monture-Okanee also cites Ojibwa elders who have instructed her o
lack of words in the language for 'justice'.

[5] Although considerable controversy exists over whether Chief Seattle actually said this, it has been attribu

him in popular representations of the Aboriginal peoples. But it is not simply sympathetic Romanticism

casts the Aboriginal in this light. The idea of not being able to own the land is a complex one that has to do

notions of stewardship and having one's identity tied up with the land (see Annie Booth and Harvey J

(1990) Ties That Bind: Native American Beliefs as a Foundation for Environmental Consciou
Environmental Ethics 12, pp. 27-43.

Perhaps most poignant for those governed by European tradition are the pronouncements of Justice Ber

his report to the Canadian Government concerning Native peoples and the development of the Canadian No

Thomas R. Berger (1988) Northern Frontier Northern Homeland: The Report of the Mackenzie Valley Pi

Inquiry (Toronto and Vancouver, Douglas and Mclntyre, revised edition, copyrighted 1977). Pages 137^
Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

138 B. Morito

a variety of Native expressions on how the land and the Aboriginal person (here, Dene and Inu
the same, identified, or inextricably connected.

[6] The Canadian National Film Board's production, 'The People, The Land,' quotes an elder

saying that the relation between the people and the land is intimate and not extractive. 'Dev

defined by the 'Southerners' is equivalent to destruction in the eyes of the Aboriginal, who under
has taken many centuries for nature to 'develop' the forests, lakes, and rivers that support their
are therefore inseparable from the land, for they come from the land.

[7] Georgina Tobac of Fort Good Hope, quoted in Berger, op. cit. p. 137 [file number C

statement is: 'Every time the white people come to the North or come to our land and start tearing

feel as if they are cutting our own flesh because that is the way we feel about our land. It is our f

[8] The early Roman Catholic Missionaries are examples of those who held this attitude. Th

heathen ideas of Native peoples had to be eradicated through dispossessing children of their herit

carried out by the church's residential schools.

[9] Pierre E. Trudeau (1992) Remarks on Aboriginal and Treaty Rights in Wesley Cragg (ed.)
Moral Issues (Third Ed.) (Toronto, McGraw-Hill, Ryerson Inc.) pp. 267-8.
[10] The key publication here is Thomas Berger, op. cit.

[11] Minister of Supply and Services Canada (1990) Constitution Act 1982, Part II, sect. 35(

Aboriginal and treaty rights of the Aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby recognised and affirm

[12] The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (1992) Legacy: Land Power and the First Nations, pr
Journal. This and the following references are taken from this production.

[13] The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, Vol. 1, Tabs 1-4.

[14] Ibid., Tab l,pp. 1-53.
[15] Ibid., p. 32.

[16] Discussion on this matter with Norman Jacobs and his wife Carol revealed important disti

the hereditary leadership and the federally officially sanctioned leadership. The hereditary syste

represented in official proceedings. I have chosen to try to include the hereditary voice in my di

[17] James Dumont (1992) Aboriginal people and justice, in The Royal Commission on Abo
National Roundtable on Justice Issues, Nov. 25-27, Vol. l,Tab. 1.

[18] I develop this idea more at length in, Bruce Morito (1993) Holism, interest-identity and valu

Value Inquiry, 27:49-62.
[19] One need only cite liberal proponents of pro-choice in the abortion debate to witness the

rationality is used as a criterion for determining superiority or privilege. See for example, Mary

(1983) The moral and legal status of abortion, in John Thomas (ed.) Medical Ethics and Huma

Samuel Stevens), pp. 100-1; and Michael Tooley Abortion and infanticide, in R. Abe

Friquegnon (Eds.) (1982) Ethics for Modern Life (second editn) (New York, St Martin's Pr
William Frankena (1962) The concept of social justice, in Brandt (Ed.) Social Justice (Eng
N. J., Prentice-Hall), p. 19.

[20] See, for example, Tom Regan (1993) Ethical thinking and theory, in Susan J. Armstron
Botzler (Eds.) Environmental Ethics: Divergence and Convergence (New York, McGraw-Hi
see especially, 327; and Don E. Marietta Jr. (1992) Environmental holism and individuals,
above, pp. 405^410.

[21 ] This epistemically important process is one in which the individual undergoes stress (e.g., swea

hallucination-like experiences) to achieve his vision and personal fulfilment.

[22] See Dennis H. McPherson and J. Douglas Rabb (1993) Indian from the Inside, C

Phenomenology of the vision quest, Lakehead University, Centre for Northern Studies. Occa

pp. 59-82.
[23] Walter Berns (1992) Defending the death penalty in Wesley Cragg op. cit., p. 437.
[24] This now famous statement was made during the 1992 Constitutional hearings with the then Minister of
Constitutional Affairs, Joe Clark.

[25] The fact that 'Aboriginal right' or 'inherent right to self-government' would not be defined prior to its
entrenchment in the Constitution was part of a package of proposals that the Canadian people were asked to
vote on in a referendum. The package was called the 'Charlottetown Accord.'

[26] Winona Stevenson as cited on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation documentary, 'Legacy.'
[27] Stevenson is playing on an ambiguity as far as I can tell. On the one hand, 'inherent right' is used in the context

of association with Canada. Her definition, on the other hand, has only to do with what it means for an
Aboriginal person to govern him or herself.

© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Aboriginal Right: A Conciliatory Concept 139
[28] Dumont, p. 2.
[29] Bruce Clark (1990) Native Liberty, Crown Sovereignty: The Existing Aboriginal Right of Self-Govemment in

Canada (Montreal & Kingston, McGill-Queens University Press).
[30] Lloyd Barber (1992) cited on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation production, 'Legacy'.

[31] Berger,p. 128.
[32] King George II, (October 7, 1763) The Royal Proclamation, RSC 1970, app. no. 1 at 125 and 127 as cited in
Bruce Clark op. cit., p. 75.

[33] Berger, p. 217.
[34] In his careful albeit highly specific examination of Aboriginal world views, J. Baird Callicott, in Thomas W.

Overholt and J. Baird Callicot with Ojibwa Texts by William Jones (1982) Clothed in Fur and Other Tales
(New York, University Press of America), p.153, shows how the stories and myths of the Ojibwa people were
used to educate people of all ages in accordance with the view that the Ojibwa belonged to a wider community of
smaller communities (species). The idea that a human being could transform into a beaver or coyote, was meant
to convey the notion that humanity was constituted of persons with a sense of dignity and place no less than any

other creatures. Hence, a sense of respect for all creatures together with a sense that the place in which one was
nurtured was critical in developing the identity of an Ojibwa.

[35] See Dumont op. cit., 23. This message is partially reflected in Aldo Leopold's attempt to develop what has
become known as the 'Land Ethic.'Aldo Leopold (1949) A Sand County Almanac (Oxford, Oxford University
Press) pp. 202-204. I mention this here to indicate that such views need not be so foreign to us that we are
justified in claiming that the views expressed by Aboriginal peoples are so alien that they are unintelligible to the

European-based liberal. My taking the trouble to mention this has to do with several encounters with those

deeply entrenched in European liberal tradition who simply refuse to acknowledge the intelligibility of
Aboriginal philosophy.

[36] George Erasmus (1989) Twenty years of disappointed hopes, in Boyce Richardson (Ed.) Drumbeat: Anger
and Renewal in Indian Country, (Toronto, Summerhill Press), p. 5).

[37] G. M. A. Grube (Trans.) (1974) Plato's Republic (Indianapolis, Hackett Publishing Co.) [433b-c].
[38] Neil MacCormick (1982) Legal Right and Social Democracy: Essays in Legal and Political Philosophy (Oxford,
Clarendon Press), pp. 39 & 41.
[39] The National Film Board of Canada, 'The People, The Land.'
[40] Dumont op. cit., p. 23.
[41] Canada, Sessional Papers, 1871, No. 20p. 8.
[42] The Indian Act, although at present is being eliminated as law, retains this condition in Sect. 32 (1).

[43] Erasmus op. cit., p. 11.

© Society for Applied Philosophy, 1996

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


