---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Agency Problems in Early Chartered Companies: The Case of the Hudson's Bay Company
Author(s): Ann M. Carlos and Stephen Nicholas
Source: The Journal of Economic History , Dec., 1990, Vol. 50, No. 4 (Dec., 1990), pp.
853-875
Published by: Cambridge University Press on behalf of the Economic History
Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2122458
ANN M. CARLOS AND STEPHEN NICHOLAS
The problem of controlling overseas managers confronts all multilocational firms.
Historians have argued that because of the extreme time lags in communication,
chartered companies were unable to control managerial behavior. We argue that
not only did the Hudson's Bay Company understand the agency problem but also

put into operation strategies designed to attenuate opportunistic behavior. The
company used employment contracts and control systems and established a social
structure compatible with the company's aims.

INTRODUCTION

England emerged as an important trading nation during the reign of

Charles 11, 1660 to 1688. Although England already had a sizeable
textile trade with Europe, the Restoration saw a movement into what
have been called the "distant trades." By 1700 one-third of England's
imports came from North America, the West Indies, and the East; these
imports and their growth over the ensuing century made England a
world entrepot.' The work of economic historians has ably documented
the rise, course, and structure of these trade patterns. As far back as

1954 Ralph Davis asked "why was it possible to expand these distant
trades?" and over the years economic historians have advanced many
explanations of this important but yet unanswered question, including

supply- and demand-side changes in the market, innovations in transport and technology, and the general organization of commerce.2
This last factor has attracted considerable attention, since the growth

of foreign trade coincided with the rise of the chartered trading
The Journal of Economic History, Vol. L, No. 4 (Dec. 1990). ? The Economic History
Association. All rights reserved. ISSN 0022-0507.
Ann M. Carlos is Associate Professor of Economics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO
80903; and Stephen Nicholas is Associate Professor of Economic History, University of New
South Wales, Kensington, New South Wales 2033 and currently Visiting Fellow, Australia-Japan
Research Institute and Economics/Economic History Research School of the Social Sciences,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.

The authors would like to thank Lou Cain, Knick Harley, David Laidler, Douglas McCalla,
James Markusen, the participants of the many seminars at which this article was given, five
unknown referees, and an exceedingly patient editor for their many insightful comments. All errors
unfortunately remain our own. Ann Carlos would like to thank the Social Science and Humanities
Research Council of Canada for its funding for this project (410-89-0371).

' Ralph Davis, England's Overseas Trade, 1500-1700 (London, 1973), pp. 5-32.
2 Ralph Davis, "English Foreign Trade 1660-1700," in Walter E. Minchinton, The Growth of
English Overseas Trade in the 17th and 18th Centuries (London, 1969), p. 80. See also
Minchinton's "Introduction" in the same volume. Charles Wilson, England's Apprenticeship,
1603-1763 (Oxford, 1965); and Peter Mathias, First Industrial Nation: An Economic History of
Britain, 1700-1914 (Mathuen, 1969).

853

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

854 Carlos and Nicholas
companies and was accompanied by a decline in the old "regulated"
companies, such as the Levant and Eastland companies, which had
formerly conducted the European trades.3 Davis thought that the

English East India Company and the charter companies in aggregate
made a "large" contribution to Britain's overseas trade, while Charles
Wilson was even more emphatic about the charter companies: "Without the resources which only the joint stock Company could mobilise,
the expansion of trade in far-distant and turbulent lands would, at this

stage, have been impossible."4
An equally strong view is that these companies were nothing more
than monopoly franchises seeking rents. This theme is exemplified in
economic writings as early as the work of Adam Smith. Continuing a
tradition which had started at the beginning of the eighteenth century,
Smith argued that the companies existed only because of their monopoly position, without which they could not have survived in the face of
competition from individual traders. He wrote:
The directors of such companies, however, being the managers rather of other people's
money than of their own, it cannot well be expected, that they should watch over it with

the same anxious vigilance with which the partners in a private copartnery frequently
watch over their own. Like the stewards of a rich man, they are apt to consider attention
to small matters as not for their master's honour, and very easily give themselves a

dispensation from having it. Negligence and profusion, therefore, must always prevail,
more or less, in the management of the affairs of such a Company.5

Switching his attention from the directors to the overseas managers of
the trading companies, Smith argued that exclusive privilege brought
mismanagement and allowed "negligence, profusion and marversion of
their own servants," which the companies were unable to control.6

Although Smith was arguing against monopoly and for competition,
he identified the two major problems facing all multilocational and
multinational companies. The first is the problem of control being
separated from ownership; the second is how the directors or owners at
home can ensure that their agents abroad work for the benefit of the
company and not in their own self-interest.
Many economic historians concur with Smith's judgment about the
early trading companies, arguing that they were unsuccessful because
they were inefficient, evidenced by their inability to control their agents
overseas. E. L. J. Coornaert wrote that "seldom or never did the

companies set up a rigorous hierarchy.... For the most part the bonds
between these agents and their companies were exceedingly tenuous;
3 Wilson, England's Apprenticeship, p. 172. Regulated companies can be thought of most easily
as licensing institutions. Merchants, on payment of an entry fee, were admitted to the company but
thereafter traded on their own account. There was no joint ownership of stock.
4 Davis, England's Overseas Trade, p. 43; and Wilson, England's Apprenticeship, p. 173.
5 Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (Homewood. IL, 1963), book 5, chap. 1, part 3, p. 255.

6 Ibid., p. 265.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 855
distances were often immense, and everywhere the companies' representatives of all ranks were empowered to carry on trade for their
private accounts and were often, in effect, the most dangerous rivals of

their own companies."7 The historian of the Royal African Company,
Keith Davies, argued specifically that the company failed because "too
much had to be left to the discretion of employees abroad who for the
most part followed their own concerns to the detriment of the Com-

pany's."8 Wilson reached the same conclusion about the Royal African
Company but also pointed out that even the successful companies had
to face the same problems in that their "servants were remote, [the]
accounting system and methods of control inadequate."9 Indeed, the
most serious problem identified by historians seems to have been
private trade by managers; for example, K. N. Chaudhuri identified
private trade by the English East India Company's Asian managers as a
major area of conflict, and Thomas Stuart Willan thought that the real

evil for the Russia Company was private trade by its managers.'0 The
major problem confronting the trading companies, therefore, was that of
managing their managers at a distance.

Of course, it is important to remember that controlling managers of
overseas branches is a problem for all multinational firms, whether early
trading companies, nineteenth-century industrial multinationals, or to-

day's transnational firms. For contemporary international firms, Richard Caves has written that the "cost of information and supervision, the
difficulty of working out employment contracts that align the efforts of
employees with the goals of the firm . . . limit the firm's pursuit of its

ultimate goals."" 1 lBefore the age of modern communications and
transport, the problems of managing at a distance were in many ways
more acute for the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century firms than for
their modern counterparts. It is also important to realize that the

seventeenth century witnessed the formation not only of English firms

but of similar long-distance trading companies in the Netherlands,

Sweden, Prussia, Portugal, Spain, and France. 12 These companies
similarly grappled with the problem of controlling their overseas managers.

Yet, in spite of the assertions that the early trading companies failed
or suffered from their inability to control their managers, there has been
very little archival work done to ascertain whether the directors
7 E. L. J. Coornaert, "European Economic Institutions and the New World: The Chartered
Companies," in Cambridge Economic History of Europe (Cambridge, 1967), vol. 4, p. 262.
8 Keith Davies, The Royal African Company (Oxford, 1957), p. 165.
9 Wilson, England's Apprenticeship, p. 176.

1 K. N. Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company, 1660-1760
(New York, 1978); and Thomas Stuart Willan, The Early History of the Russia Company
(Manchester, 1956).

Richard Caves, Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis (New York, 1982), p. 70.

12 Coornaert, "European Economic Institutions," vol. 4.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

856 Carlos and Nicholas
understood the nature of the agency problem and what steps, if any,
they took to control the problem.'3 This article examines the agency
problem that the Hudson's Bay Company faced because its directors
were located in London, while the acquisition operations occurred
around Hudson Bay in Canada. In at least this particular case, the
company recognized the agency problem and looked for ways to control

managerial behavior. We describe the ways in which this company

sought to put into operation incentives and mechanisms designed to
attenuate the problem.
BEARING THE CHARGE WITHOUT HAVING THE ADVANTAGE

Long-distance trade requires that managers have some discretionary
power, at the same time directors must ensure that such power is used
to the best advantage of the company. This is the economics of the
agency problem.'4 The stress put on this issue in the literature on the
early chartered companies is easy to understand. For these companies

there existed a tremendous time lag between the issuance of orders in

England or in Europe and the appearance of commodities from afar. The
turnaround time could take anywhere from eighteen months to two and

a half years.'5 Even when the commodities arrived, the directors still
had to ascertain whether the output before them was the maximum
amount they should have received or whether their managers had
cheated them. Cheating could involve mere shirking of effort or could
involve a more active policy of trading for commodities on one's own
account at the expense of the company. This latter problem (private
trade) is believed by most historians of the chartered companies to have

been serious. According to Thomas Stuart Willan, although the Russia
13 As a corollary, there has been no questioning of the types of situations in which agency
problems are likely to arise. It is unclear whether economic historians thought that all multiloca-

tional trading companies faced an agency problem of the same magnitude or whether the magnitude
(and the ability to control the agency problem) was related to the particular reasons for each
company's existence. In this article we are taking, as given, the hierarchical structure of the

Hudson's Bay Company, which implies a principal/agent relationship between the factories and the
head office. The extent to which this was the most beneficial organizational structure is discussed
in Ann M. Carlos and Stephen Nicholas, "Giants of An Earlier Capitalism: The Early Chartered
Companies as an Analogue of the Modern Multinational," Business History Review, 26 (Autumn
1988).

14 This section relies on Kenneth Arrow, "The Economics of Agency," in John Pratt and
Richard Zeckhauser, eds., Principals and Agents: The Structure of Business (Boston, 1984), pp.

27-51; Neil Strong and Michael Waterson, "Principals, Agents and Information," in Roger Clarke
and Tony McGuinness, eds., The Economics of the Firm (Oxford, 1987), pp. 18-61; Michael Jensen
and William Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership

Structure," Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (Nov. 1978), pp. 305-11; Stephen Ross, "The
Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem," American Economic Review, 63 (May

1973), pp. 134-49; Oliver Williamson, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism (New York, 1985),

chaps. 2, 3, 7, 8; and Eugene Fama and Michael Jensen, "Separation of Ownership and Control,"
Journal of Law and Economics, 25 (June 1983), pp. 301-26.

15 Carlos and Nicholas, "Giants of An Earlier Capitalism," gave a description of the physical
organization of the long-distance trades.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 857
Company was concerned about "horedom [sic], incontinency, drunk-

enness, and idleness, the greatest evil was private trade."'16 In 171
Dutch East India Company accused its Bengali factories of putting aside

the most profitable assortment of textiles for their own benefit.'7 The
English East India Company complained that the inter-Asian trade was

poorly developed because of private trade.'8 In 1691 the Royal African
Company wrote: "We have reason to complain that our factors and
some of the chiefs manage private trade which is the way to encourage
interlopers and ruin our stock by bearing the charge without having the

advantage. " 19
The Hudson's Bay Company was no exception. Douglas MacKay

called private trade the "gravest of all Company offenses."20 Edwin
Ernest Rich, the company's main historian, wrote that "the business of
private trade was a perpetual worry to the Company, as it always was

to the East India Company....52' In describing the letter of recall
written to Charles Bayly in May 1674 Rich wrote: "He is to hand over
all trade goods, stores and papers, and to 'bee assistant' to Lydall [new

governor] in discovereing & preventeing private trade. Always private
trade. "22
The ability of agents to behave in their own self-interests occurs in
situations of asymmetrical information and uncertainty. In asymmetri-

cal situations the information between any two contracting parties is
unequal. For the chartered companies, managers had more and better

information about the foreign location, while the directors had more

information about the firm. The presence of uncertainty meant that
outputs could not be linked invariably with inputs or efforts of managers. For example, in the fur trade the harvest of furs was somewhat
random. The severity of the winter, disease, or the activity of Indians or

competitors had an impact on the level of trading activity. Only the
managers in Canada observed the true harvest, not the company. If the
supply of furs shipped was low, the directors could not have known
whether this was because the harvest was low or because its managers
were engaged in private trade. Informational asymmetries allowed the

private trade problem to exist.23 The resulting opportunism by manag
16 Willan, The Early History of the Russia Company, p. 37.
17 Kristof Glamann, Dutch Asiatic Trade 1620-1740 (The Hague, 1981), p. 147.
18 Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia, p. 208.
19 Davies, The Royal African Company, p. 255.

20 Douglas MacKay, The Honourable Company (Toronto, 1949), p. 67.
21 Edwin Ernest Rich, ed., Minutes of the Hudson's Bay Company, 1671-74 (London, 1942), vol.
5, p. 101.

22 Ibid., pp. 101, 112, emphasis is added.
23 An alternative way to phrase the problems arising from asymmetrical information and
uncertainty is in terms of moral hazard and adverse selection. Moral hazard relates to the work

effort of the agent, while adverse selection relates to informational asymmetries between
counteracting parties. Thus the adverse selection problem allows the moral hazard problem to

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

858 Carlos and Nicholas
reduced company profits and increased returns to managers. Firms,
therefore, needed to find ways to control their managers or to reduce the
level of private trade.
An obvious place for any firm to exercise control is with the employment
contract. The remuneration package and work provisions in employment
contracts are critical in reducing opportunism and encouraging managers to
work in the best interests of the firm by making it expensive for the worker
to cheat. Firms can use both fixed and incentive fee payments to encourage
managers to work hard. However, when information is asymmetric,
changes in managers' efforts will remain less than perfectly detectable.
Thus pay for performance systems may still invite shirking or in fact induce

counterproductive efforts.24 For their part, managers promise, as a condition of employment, to work hard and in the best interest of the company.
Such promises are, of course, open to evasion.

Since employment contracts do not necessarily solve the problem of
private trade, firms need to generate supplemental sources of information: systems of internal controls to monitor managers. Written records

of decisions and notification of compliance to formal rules and procedures (accounting procedures, inventory systems, and fee-incentive
structures) provide a flow of information to the head office. Thus output
levels and information derived from the records form two separate but

interdependent methods of checking on the work activity of managers.
This can be further supplemented by seeking reports on managers from
other employees and from third parties.
Not all monitoring and control devices which reduce shirking operate

on the system of economic rewards and punishments. Firms are also
social systems and have a social hierarchy and unique "culture," in
which there are mores and values which sanction and prohibit certain
types of behavior. Frequently directors try to create an ethical system,

especially when the firm is a family concern.25 Insofar as managers
conform to the mores of the firm, they are constrained in their behavior
and monitoring costs are reduced. An internal social system which

instills values directly into managers is a powerful instrument used in a
company's attempts to reduce private trade, to attenuate opportunism,
and to encourage high levels of effort on the part of managers.

While there are ways in which firms can control the opportunistic
tendencies of its managers, to do so is not costless. Incentives, such as
high salaries or bonuses, and monitoring procedures all are costs to the
firm. The profitability of the firm will depend on both the effectiveness
exist, which, in turn, can result in self-seeking behavior by agents and a resulting loss in profits for
the firm.

24 George P. Baker, Michael C. Jensen, and Kevin J. Murphy, "Compensation and Incentives:
Practice vs. Theory," Journal of Finance, 42 (July 1988), p. 599.

25 Peter Buckley and Michael Casson, "A Theory of Co-operation in International Business"
(University of Reading Discussion Paper in International Business, No. 102, Jan. 1987), pp. 1-39.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 859
of such measures and their costs. The key question therefore is the
circumstances under which incentives and monitoring will be effective
relative to costs.
Two features of the external environment are important in determining profitability: the cost effectiveness of monitoring, and the ease with
which managers may engage in private trade. Both of these factors
differed widely among the chartered companies and may help explain

differing company successes.26 The more highly cost effective monitoring is, the higher the firm's profitability for a given level of monitoring.
In addition, the firm can change the level of monitoring (an endogenous
choice variable) as its effectiveness changes and further increase its
profitability. If private trade is costly and inefficient, we would expect
less of it at any given incentive and monitoring levels by the firm, and
hence higher profitability. Reductions in the efficiency of private trade
in turn imply optimal changes in the incentives and monitoring strategy

that further increase the firm's profits. Thus firm profitability and
success may be fairly sensitive to exogenous environmental factors

dictating the effectiveness of monitoring and the efficiency of private
trade.
Taken together these two parameters go a long way toward explaining
when a hierarchical-firm structure will succeed and when a firm will

break apart. In short, when monitoring costs are low and the efficiency
of private trade is low, a hierarchical firm is more likely to succeed.
Whether monitoring costs are high or low depends, in part, on the

physical environment in which the managers operate. To the extent that
operations take place in an environment with few contact points with
the outside economy or when all managerial activity can only be
conducted through a very small number of channels, then monitoring
costs will be lower than in an environment in which this is not the case.
Thus one would expect monitoring costs to be low, all else being equal,

for the Hudson's Bay Company, whose managers were relatively
isolated around Hudson Bay and were dependent on the company ship
for communication.

It must be recognized, however, that Hudson Bay's isolated environ-

ment does not mean that the private trading problem can be ignored.
The nature of the market in which a firm operates determines the impact

of any level of private trade on profitability. In a very profitable
environment a firm can afford to ignore some given level of private
trading by its managers, but in a more depressed environment no level
of private trade can be tolerated. Indeed, it is the nature of the market
26 The Royal African Company, which was chartered in 1672, two years after the Hudson's Bay
Company, faced a serious agency problem. Monitoring was difficult and agents could easily engage
in private trade. For a discussion of that company's efforts to control its agency problem, see Ann
M. Carlos, "The Royal African Company and Its Managers" (University of Western Ontario

mimeo, Mar. 1990).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

860 Carlos and Nicholas
in which the Hudson's Bay Company operated which helps to explain
why this company was quickly unwilling to permit any private trade by
its managers.
With its charter of 1672 the Hudson's Bay Company was given a
monopoly position within England to carry on a fur trade in Hudson

Bay. The charter did not free the company from competition in either its
input or output market. The Hudson's Bay Company faced from its
inception almost continuous French competition. This rivalry was very
intense. This took the form of traders approaching the Bay overland
from the St. Lawrence River and coming into Hudson Bay by ship. It
also involved war. "In the twelve years, 1686-97, the French attacked
Moose, Rupert and Albany Rivers, New Severn, and York Fort three
times; only once, at York in 1690, did they fail. The English sent two
expeditions to the Bottom of the Bay and one against York Fort; only

that of 1688 failed.... 27 The wars with France brought financial
problems. The price of furs fell while the price of the trade goods rose.

Shipping and insurance costs rose, while in some years the company
was unable to send even one ship to Hudson Bay. Indeed, Rich argued

that the company's "survival was due to its mastery of the essentials of
its trade as much as to the privileges which it enjoyed....28 One of
the essentials was "its firm adherence to close control" and "in
particular, the increasing resistance to private trade by ships' captains

and other servants of the Company.... '29 Thus it is within the context
of a war-troubled market that the company instituted a set of policies
designed to reduce at least the level of internal competition in the
company.

A SYSTEM OF CONTROL

Contracts and Incentives

The managers or "officers" at Hudson Bay were employed to
perform two functions. The most important was trading for furs with
Indians, while the secondary function, also viewed as important by the
London Committee, was managing the work force at the Bay. Inadequate performance and opportunism could occur in either of these

areas, and it was the committee's job to decipher from the information
flows what actually was occurring.

An examination of labor-management activity gives some insight into
the way the London Committee operated. The committee had very
strict expectations about the behavior of its workers. They were

27 Edwin Ernest Rich, ed., Hudson's Bay Copy Booke of Letters, Commissions, Instr
Outward, 1688-1696 (London, 1957), vol. 20, p. xx.

28 Edwin Ernest Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, 1670-1870 (London, 19
vol. 1, p. 57.

29 Ibid., p. 55.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 861
supposed to be sober, industrious, and, by and large, celibate; for
example, a letter written by the committee in 1714 and read to the men
required that "(a) all persons to attend prayers, (b) 'To live lovingly with
one another not to swear or quarrel but to live peaceable without
drunkenness or Profaneness', (c) No man to meddle, trade or affront
any of Indians, nor to concern themselves with women."30 Initially, the
expectations of the committee were infrequently, if ever, met. The
managers, in letters to the committee, claimed that they were unable to
control the labor force because the workers were unsuitable for their
jobs. The committee then had to use the information flows to determine
to what extent its managers were to blame or its work force was
unsuitable. Since most servants had been hired in London and were
used to a life that countervened the requirements of prayer, sobriety,
and peacefulness, the London Committee chose to give its managers the
benefit of the doubt.
Instead of chiding the managers for allowing the men to get drunk, the

committee pursued a strategy designed to alleviate the problem and to
make easier both the supervisory task of the manager and the deciphering task of the committee. The committee changed its labor force, trying
to find workers who were more ideally suited to life on Hudson Bay.
Within a few years of operation, the committee started to hire from

Scotland, the view being that Scots would be more used to the cold.
This did not solve all problems. By 1700 the company started to hire
from the Orkney Islands, which quickly became the sole source of

labor.3' Conditioned by life on the Islands, Orcadians were particularly
suited to the conditions at Hudson Bay. Now, the committee was better
able to judge the performance of its manager. To the extent that
brawling, drunkenness, or other forms of "loose living" occurred, the
manager was deemed responsible and might be brought home or sent to
another post as a second-in-command.
The primary function of the managers on Hudson Bay was to acquire
furs for the company, and it is in this area that the problem of

opportunistic behavior loomed large. To counteract this behavior, the
London Committee used a variety of contracts and incentives to ensure
adequate performance by its managers.

30 Harold A. Innis, The Fur Trade in Canada (Toronto, 1930), p. 135. For a more detaile
discussion of the Orcadians in the Hudson's Bay Company, see John Nicks, "The Role of
Orcadians in the Fur Trade," in Arthur Ray and Carol M. Judd, eds., Old Trails and New

Directions: Papers of the Third North American Far Trade Conference (Toronto, 1980); and Rich,

The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, pp. 377-92. These regulations reduced the
problems that can occur when small groups of individuals live together in crowded circumstances
for long periods of time. The use of Orcadians may have further reduced the tensions that could
have arisen.
31 The desire to change the work force was reinforced by the wars with France. Due to the wars
men were no longer easily available in London because of press gauges, and the route north was
safer than going south along the British channel.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

862 Carlos and Nicholas
Each individual hired by the Hudson's Bay Company was given a
formal contract that specified the number of years to be spent on the
Bay, the salary, and any other stipulations that might have been
negotiated, such as care of a wife or children in the event the man died.
The money wages paid underestimated the real wages since the company provided housing, food, and transportation to and from the Bay
and a multiyear contract. Even so, in comparison to a list of wages for
British workers, the managers were very well paid for the period.32
Charles Bayly, the first governor at Hudson Bay, was initially given a
salary of ?50 per annum, but that was quickly raised to ?200. A

successor, John Nixon, had an initial salary of ?100, which was raised
to ?200 in his second year of office.33 High salaries, by increasing the
opportunity cost of opportunistic behavior, helped potentially to reduce
such activity. The fact that men regularly throughout the eighteenth

century renewed their contracts at the Bay is further evidence that
salaries were generous and perhaps that opportunism was not a problem.
The policy of high salaries was reinforced both by salary increases
and commendations and by gratuities. During the early years of the

company's history, the committee seemed to have had a deliberate
policy of encouraging increased effort through end-of-year monetary
rewards, which were not necessarily tied to increased output levels. The
company's belief that such a policy increased work effort is evident in
a letter of 1690 to George Geyer, governor of York Factory:
Having Resolved on our parts not to faile of giveing encouragement to all whome wee
find dilligent and active to promote our Interest, Wee have amongst others taken into

Consideration Mr. Lawson the warehousekeeper and being well satisfied of his Carraidg
and Care in the station, have ordered him a gratuity of Twenty pounds, and moreover

Complyed with his humble request in Increasing his sallary to Forty pounds p. Ann.34

Making the same point, the company wrote to one Mr. Walsh in the
same year, "you may see our Resolves to Leave noe merritt unrewarded for your further encouragement in the Preservation of our

Rights and Encrease of the trade wee have voted you fifty pounds
Gratuity, over and above your Fixed salary."35 Not only were gratuities
commonplace but they were large. In the examples presented here
gratuities ranged from 50 to 100 percent of salary.

In addition to high real wages and gratuities which should have

32 Jeffrey Williamson, "Structure of Pay in Britain, 1710-1911," in Paul Uselding, ed., Resear
in Economic History (Greenwich, CT, 1982), vol. 7, p. 48, appendix table 4. Salaries for the men
at the Bay are found in Innis, Fur Trade in Canada, pp. 124, 125; and in Rich, ed., Hudson's Bay
Copy Booke, vol. 20.
3 Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, pp. 81, 92.

34 Rich, ed., Hudson's Bay Copy Booke, vol. 20, p. 103.
35 Ibid., p. 105. Mr. Walsh was in charge of the factory at New Severn in 1690, earning a salary
of ?50 per annum.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 863
discouraged opportunism, contracts originally gave the men the right to
trade for furs on their own account. In its instructions to the first ships
sent out to the Bay, the company wrote:
Some small private adventures may be also carryed by you and your men which wee doe
not refuse to allow but doe absolutely restrained all persons from tradeing themselves
with the Indians because thereby our Trade may be destroyed and the said Mr.
Gooseberry [Grosseilliers] and Mr. Radisson loose theire credit with the Indians.
Private ventures were therefore to be "disposed of in a like manner as our owne goods

are. "36

Why the committee allowed such a policy is still unresolved. It may
have been that Grosseilliers and Radisson negotiated private trade as
part of their contract or that the company was copying a policy to be
found in other overseas chartered companies, such as the East India
Company. In any event, private trade encouraged opportunism. Opportunistic managers, by purchasing the best furs for themselves and
devoting a disproportionate amount of time to their private trade,
reduced company profits. The London Committee quickly recognized
that allowing private trade was not a useful policy, and within two years
it was declared illegal.37
Even though the company banned private trade by its managers in
1672, it was not easy to eradicate the problem. The London Committee
first looked for a solution within the formal contract structure by
requiring that all managers and ships' captains take an oath declaring

that they would not engage in private trade. The use of such an oath
started very early in the company's history. In 1683 Captain Samuel
Edwards, commander of the Friendship, appeared before the "Committee and made oath neither Directly or indirectly to derive any private
trade outward or homewards dureing the present Expedition and to use

all possible meanes he can to prevent private trade in others."38 The
success of oaths in reducing opportunism depends on the mores of the
period and the character of the individual. Certainly some managers

treated the oath seriously. For example, in 1685 Radisson and his group

of Frenchmen initially refused to take the oath of fidelity which required
them to restrain from private trade.39 The company eventually came to
an agreement with Radisson which excluded the right to private trade.
As well as having to take an oath, early managers were asked to post
bonds. Indeed, in 1685, the same year in which Radisson and his men
36 Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, p. 55. Mddard Chouart Grosseilliers
and Pierre Esprit Radisson sailed to London in the 1660s and were instrumental in launching a
British attempt to get furs in northern Canada. Their efforts resulted in the formation of the
Hudson's Bay Company.

37 Rich, ed., Minutes, 1671-74, vol. 5, p. 38.
38 Edwin Ernest Rich, ed., Minutes of the Hudson's Bay Company, 1679-1684. First Part:
1679-1682 (London, 1945), vol. 8, p. 228.

39 Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, p. 179.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

864 Carlos and Nicholas
had originally refused to take the oath of fidelity, the group was asked
to put up bonds. Radisson gave a bond of ?300 that he would make the
voyage and a further bond of ?2,000 that he would fulfill his covenant.
The other Frenchmen were required to put up bonds of ?500. Such
bonds were asked not just of groups such as the French, who had shown
a reluctance to abandon private trade, but of many of the company's
early managers. As early as 1674 William Lydall, who had been chosen
as governor to replace Bayly and was to be the second governor at the

Bay, was asked to put up a bond of ?1,000.40 We have found little
evidence that those bonds were forfeited, implying that they were
successful in reducing opportunism. With the emergence of a professional managerial class within the company by the end of the eighteenth
century, the use of bonds seemed to disappear.
Further experimentation by the London Committee led to the introduction of a new incentive within the formal contract structure. As well
as multiyear contracts in which managers were well paid and abundantly supplied with commodities for their own tables, they were

allowed to trap their own furs.4' Rich argued that the company
introduced private trapping as an incentive designed to keep men
working in Hudson Bay during a time of possible French attack. Private
trapping would raise men's income in a manner thought to be costless to
the company. It also would increase the number of small furs which
were selling well in England and possibly teach the men survival skills

which would allow them to winter away from the posts.42
Although trapping increased managers' income and thus raised the
opportunity cost of losing one's job, it brought the London Committee
face to face, once again, with the issue of opportunistic behavior.
Private trapping gave managers a mechanism for masking private trade
and also opened the opportunity for unscrupulous managers to substitute company furs for their own poorer quality furs. To attenuate this
problem, the conditions for private trapping and the penalties for

cheating were carefully specified. In the letter of instructions sent out in
1701, the committee encouraged trapping "all sorts of small ffurs as ffox

woolfe quickahash [Wolverene] Martin feathers, &ca." "All skins
except those of foexes were to be delivered into the warehouse by the
end of February and each man's catch would be sent to London under
his own mark. One half of the proceeds from the sale by candle of these
small furs and feathers would be paid to each man's order in London. If
skins were concealed instead of being delivered into the warehouse the
40 Ibid., pp. 79, 179.

41 The letters sent to the Bay listed the commodities sent out for the managers' table,
example, "Clarett, Hock, Sack Soe and Sherry." See Rich, ed., Hudson's Bay Copy Booke, vol.
20, p. 234.

42 Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, p. 374.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 865
offender would not only forfeit them but also all his wages."43 By
requiring all furs to be in the warehouse before the Indians came to trade
and by specifying penalties for abuses, the committee hoped to control
private trapping. Nevertheless, private trapping was open to abuse and
was, without monitoring, of questionable success in increasing managerial effort on behalf of the company. The company realized this and

instituted a system of internal control to enhance the supervision of its
managers and to curtail private trade and abuses of private trapping.
Monitoring and Internal Controls
At the heart of the company's ability to control the conduct of
managers and to ensure that they performed satisfactorily lay a system
of monitoring and internal controls. Private trapping had reintroduced

the problem of private trade because privately trapped furs could not be
distinguished in London from privately traded ones. As we said earlier,
wiping out private trade was not easy. This was due both to the

distances involved and the particular difficulties in monitoring ships'
captains. The captains of the ships that arrived annually at the Bay acted
as the main conduit for privately traded furs either by providing
unofficial trade goods or by purchasing the furs from the managers for
resale on the continent. Beginning in 1683 the men at the Bay were
warned that all their baggage would be searched for contraband trade

goods or illegal furs. This, however, only diverted the trade to the ships'
captains. To combat this the committee searched the ships before they
left London for contraband brandy and trade goods and for furs when

they returned. The procedure for searching returned vessels was highly
organized. The company minutes for December 1679 reported:
Charles Wilmott and Jeremy Griffith being appointed to goe on board the John and
Alexander and to stay there to prevent all Frauds and Embezelments, tooke their Oathes

so to doe and carried with them a Letter to Capt. Walker to receive them on board."

The oath the "waiters" took specified clearly what was expected. "I
doe Sweare to be true to the Governor & Company of Adventurers of

England trading into Hudsons Bay I will go on board the ship John &
Alexander as Soone as conveniently I can, and I will endeavour to my
power to discover and prevent all frauds & Embezlements wch. are or
may be comitted by any person or pesons there and I shall not come
from on board the Sayd Ship untill she be delivered or I receave farther
orders."45 In addition, the committee sealed all legal consignments of
4 Keith G. Davies, ed., Letters from Hudson Bay, 1703-1740 (London, 1965), vol. 25, p. 11.
"Sale 'by the candle' was a system in which an 'upset price' was called as the candle was lit and
bids were made as the candle burned. Whoever had made the highest bid when the candle guttered
out was the purchaser." Rich, The History of The Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, p. 68.

44 Rich, ed., Minutes, 1679-84, vol. 8, pp. 11-12.
45 Ibid., footnote on p. 11.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

866 Carlos and Nicholas
liquor and trade goods before consigning them aboard ships in an effort
to discover illegal trade goods when the ships were searched before
departing for Hudson Bay. In spite of the precautions, some furs were
still smuggled into England. In a report to the committee in 1682
Governor John Nixon wrote, "indeed most or all of them [men] have
got private trade more, or less, which I cannot -possibly come to
the knowledge of, they being great with the masters and the ships
company. ,46
The committee also had to prevent high-quality Indian furs being
substituted for low-quality private furs and had to prevent trade goods

being used for purposes of private trade, with the furs then being
shipped as the returns on private trapping. These areas were difficult to
monitor. In cases where the committee was suspicious of the size of
private trapping, it demanded assurances from its managers that they
had actually trapped all the furs and had not received them in exchange
for presents or in gratitude from the Indians. According to Rich, the
committee refused to believe, probably correctly, that a man could trap

?100 worth of furs a year in addition to his ordinary work. In 1679 a
martin skin, which was one of the most valuable of the small skins, sold
for four shillings a skin in England. To earn ?100, a man would have had
to trap 500 good-quality skins during the winter months. In comparison
Fort Albany received 915 martin skins in trade in 1701 and 369 in 1702.
In those same years, Eastmain received 411 and 207 skins.47 The
problem of managers substituting low-quality furs for the company's
furs does not seem to have been too serious. The London correspondence before 1763 recorded only one case of significant theft. In 1721
Mr. Hall, the warehouse keeper at York Factory, was accused of
"taking ye best of ye comps out of ye Bundles and puting his worst

Martins Instead thereof. .".48
The penalties for engaging in private trade were, from the company's
perspective, severe ranging from reprimands to loss of posted bonds to

demotion or dismissal. The severity of such penalties for the individual,
however, depended on the availability of alternative opportunities.

Clearly, opportunities were greater for ships' captains than for managers, since many more openings existed in the maritime trades for skilled

captains, proven by the journey to Hudson Bay, than existed for the
skills acquired by managers in fur trading.49 Even if a man was not
46 Ibid., appendix A, p. 244.

47 Rich, ed., Minutes, 1679-84, vol. 8, appendix B, pp. 320-27, detailed the prices paid for furs
at the sale held Feb. 3, 1679. See Arthur J. Ray and Donald Freeman, "Give us Good Measure":
An Economic Analysis of Relations Between the Indians and The Hudson's Bay Company Before
1763 (Toronto, 1978), p. 168, table 18.

48 Ray and Freeman, Good Measure, p. 115.

49 Hugh G. T. Aitken, "Defensive Expansionism: The State and Economic Growth," in Hugh
G. T. Aitken, ed., The State and Economic Growth (New York, 1959), commented on the fact that

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 867
dismissed for private trade, he could be held under suspicion by the
company, which could mean denial of promotion. Of course, the
company was well aware that it could use positive as well as negative
incentives. For example, ships' captains were promised 20 percent of
the value of any illegal furs confiscated. In spite of this incentive, no
captains brought forward confiscated furs.
Private trapping was finally declared illegal in 1770. Its existence for

50 years suggests that the negative aspects of the scheme could not have
outweighed the positive gains for the company. In fact, to compensate
for the end of private trapping, the committee revised the salary scales.
Managers now received ?130 per year while ships' captains got ?12 per
month and ?100 gratuity with extra allowances in lieu of their customary
"presents." A bonus system was also introduced. Each manager
received a bonus of three shillings per score of beaver traded and a
ship's captain one shilling sixpence. In 1770-1771 this amounted to ?172
for each chief factor, which was forfeited if the person took part in any
illegal trade. However, this was an unusually large sum. This bonus
scheme existed in some form until 1810, when for a number of years the

company went back to a straight wage contract, but one in which the
salaries were adjusted to take account of what could be earned under the

bonus scheme. In 1810 the two superintendents (governors) each
received ?400 per annum, with chief factors receiving ?150. These

salary figures suggest that only a manager sure of remaining undetected

would cheat; the opportunity cost of losing one's job was very high.50
The change in schemes was part of a more complete change in the
orientation of the company. The year 1763 marked the British conquest
of French Canada and by 1770 an organized British trade from the St.
Lawrence basin based along the lines of the previous French trade was
well organized and already threatening to encircle Hudson's Bay

Company posts around the Bay. In response the company finally started
to establish permanent inland trading posts.
While the London Committee could and did search ships, baggage,
and letters, it further enhanced its ability to control the conduct of its

managers by determining the price at which the managers traded
commodities for furs. From the first the committee wanted its methods

of trade to be both conservative and consistent.5' This resulted in two
standards of trade: the Official Standard which valued all trade goods in
the company's unit of account, a "Made Beaver" (the price of a single
prime male beaver skin), and the Comparative Standard which assigned
made beaver values to all furs received from the Indians. The establishsome Hudson's Bay Company factors went to London to act as buying agents for the company,
using the expertise gained in trade. These numbers, however, were never very large.

50 Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, p. 602, and vol. 2, pp. 103, 2915' Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, p. 64.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

868 Carlos and Nicholas
ment of such standards helped to control the discretionary behavior of
managers by making it more difficult to cheat and by eliminating
competition which maximized the profits of branch plants at the
expense of the company. These fixed price standards also satisfied the
Indians' demand for certainty of the prices that they would receive for
the skins.52
By exactly specifying the values of all furs and trade goods, the
company controlled the discretionary behavior of its managers. The
volume of furs received combined with the volume of trade goods sent
gave the committee a high level of information about its managers. At
the same time, as these fixed standards reduced the possibility of
cheating by managers, they removed, however, all discretion over the
terms of trade both from the company and the managers. Thus managers
were denied the ability to give presents or, as Rich said, the scope to
leave items around for the Indians to pick up in passing. The Indians,
while enjoying fixed prices for furs, wanted a ceremonial aspect to the

trade which required gift giving and presents.53 The committee's motive
for wanting to change the standard was the price inflation during the
wars with France, which increased the price of trade goods and the

costs of shipping while depressing fur prices. The lack of discretionary
power by either managers or the London Committee operated to the
company's disadvantage.
A study of the Official Standard shows that it neither varied much

over time nor between posts.54 But this invariance disguises the true
nature of the trading relationship and, in particular, the ability of the
London Committee to control its agents. Due to the war, the committee
allowed the factors to depart from the official prices, writing that "the
method of which is however left to your discretion so to manage as not

to give any disgust to the natives."55 As a result, the factor essentially
tried to obtain what the market would bear from the Indians, being at all

times circumscribed by the fact that the Indians knew the official prices
for furs and what was received at other posts. Thus, what has become
known as the Factor's or Double Standard occurred in those commod-

ities most amenable to slight variations such as brandy, cloth, and
tobacco, giving the factors goods on hand for ceremonial gift giving and
discretionary presents.
The existence of the Factor's Standard reduced the company's

control over its managers in that it created a bundle of trade goods

52 Thus, just as the very existence of the branch plants around the Bay signified a long-ter
commitment on the part of the company, so too did these standards. See Arthur J. Ray, The
Indians and the Fur Trade (Toronto, 1974), chap. 3, for a more complete discussion of these
standards.

53 Ibid., chap. 5.

54 A. Rotstein and D. Foot, "The Two Economies of the Hudson's Bay Company" (University
of Toronto Working Paper Series, No. 8710, July 1987).

55 Rich, ed., Hudson's Bay Copy Booke, vol. 20, p. 78.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 869
which the managers could use to their own advantage, such as in private
trade. To ensure that this was not the case, the committee had requested
that the clerks and managers keep an itemized record of exactly what
trade goods were sold for which furs in the Account Book. This proved
to be impossible since a large volume of trade took place within a very
short period of time, and the Indians were anxious to complete
transactions quickly and start on their journey home. The committee
then allowed the chief factor to make an inventory of the trade goods
and furs at the end of each trading period. The account books, then,
record the furs obtained, commodities traded, the goods remaining for

both trade and post use, and the bundle of trade goods freed up by the
use of the Double Standard. Arthur Ray and Donald Freeman described
how this was done.
The total quantity of each type of fur or country produce brought in by the Indians is . . .
listed along with the aggregate M[ade] B[eaver] value of the commodities as determined

according to the comparative standard. The value of the goods traded (priced according
to the standard of trade) is then subtracted and the remainder is termed the "overplus".
If all of the goods and furs had been exchanged according to the official standards listed
in the account books, then the value of the furs received should have equalled that of the
goods traded and there would be no overplus.56

Thus for each post each year a balancing item in the account books is

the level of the overplus. The company sought to ensure that it received
this information by laying down precise regulations and rigorous standards governing the way that the account books, post journals, and

London Correspondence Inward-Official were kept.
For the London Correspondence Inward-Official, the company required that the letters be written in paragraphs, each coinciding with
that in the Correspondence Outward. John Knight, chief factor at York
in 1716, wrote in one of his letters: "I shall endeavour to follow your
instructions as near as I can so I hope you'll excuse me from answering
to every particular paragraph of your letter." In the 1730s James Isham,
governor at Churchill, was repeatedly reproved by the committee for
not writing his general letter home "in paragraphs in the approved
manner. "57 The annual letter sent to each post at the Bay contained
both the committee's instructions to that post and any questions,
queries, or comments that the committee might have had concerning the
account books received. These letters contained information relating to
the regulation of the trade, the wages of men to be rehired, and the state
of the market in England. For example, certain posts might be asked to
56 Actual quantities of overplus made can be found in the factory accounts, with some amounts
being given in Rich, ed., Hudson's Bay Copy Booke, vol. 20, p. xliv. A very detailed discussion of
the composition of the accounts and derivation can be found in Ray and Freeman, Good Measure,
chap. 9.

57 Davies, ed., Letters form Hudson Bay, vol. 25, p. 58; and Rich, The History of the Hudson's
Bay Company, vol. 1, p. 543.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

870 Carlos and Nicholas
develop a timber trade or to increase trade in certain items such as
feathers, whale oil, or castoreum. The Correspondence Inward were the
factors' responses to the committee's yearly letter. The factors' letters
usually began by acknowledging the receipt of the packet sent out and
by detailing what documentation they were sending to England. Joseph
Myatt's letter from Albany Factor in 1727 in its first paragraph stated
that the committee "will find here enclosed together with the journal,

weekly allowance, bill of lading, invoice and indent." 58 These letters
then gave the number of Made Beaver shipped, explaining why the post
had such a poor return or congratulating themselves on their hard work
which had produced good results. They talked about how orders had
been followed; for example, Myatt wrote in paragraph five: "According
to your orders I have sent home six samples of the England brandy
which came over this year with the number of each cask fixed to every
sample and have likewise sent you a sample of the brandy which came
over last year, but it is everyone's opinion it is nothing near so good as
that which came over the year before...." From these letters one can
obtain a detailed picture of the way in which the managers at the Bay
complied with the instructions sent out to them.
It was through comparison of the account books, the Correspondence
Inward, the actual quantities of furs shipped from the Bay, and the

committee's records of the trade goods sent from England that the
London Committee was in a position to judge how their managers were
handling the trade at the Bay and whether any manager was defrauding
the company. This information flow gave the potential to audit each
manager's performance, and the records indicate that the company used

it to monitor its managers and make it more difficult for them to cheat,
in particular through private trade. One way to monitor their performance was through examination of a number of indices that allowed

comparisons through time and to reprove, dismiss, or identify inexperienced managers. One such index has been described by Ray and
Freeman. They argued that the committee compared the level of

overplus for each post with its level of expenses and used the resulting
net return as a decision-making tool. Table I shows these figures for
Fort Churchill during the decade 1721 to 1731. The overplus column
measures the bundle of trade goods freed up by paying the Indians

below the Official Standard. Some of these freed-up goods, however,
were used in the gift-giving ceremonies associated with trade and were
an expense of the trade. The table shows a dramatic reversal in the level

of the net return in 1722, which continued for four years. Richard
Norton was the chief trader during these years; in 1727, when he was
relieved of his command, the committee wrote:
58 Davies, ed., Letters from Hudson Bay, vol. 25, pp. 121-23.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 871
TABLE 1

FORT CHURCHILL: EXPENSES AND OVERPLUS

Date

Overplus

1721

Expenses

$2,826

1722

696

Net

$1,140

1,747

Return

$1,686

-1,051

1723

630

1,365

-735

1724

567

1,341

-774

1725

634

1,853

-1,219

1726

601

1,722

-1,121

1727

2,017

908

1,109

1728

4,135

898

3,237

1729

3,131

896

2,235

1730

2,650

894

1,756

1731

4,769

1,956

2,813

Notes: The Hudson's Bay Company's official rates of exchange for trade goods and furs remained
fixed for long periods of time. The actual rates of exchange on trade goods could vary. The amount
by which the actual exchange rate differed from the official rate was termed overplus. Not all of this
reflected a gain for the company, as some had to be used in gift-giving ceremonies and thus
constituted an expense.
Source: Arthur J. Ray and Donald B. Freeman, "Give us Good Measure": An Economic Analysis

of Relations Between the Indians and The Hudson's Bay Company Before 1763 (Toronto 1978).

We observe in the Accounts you have sent us, that your over Trade hath been every
year very small compared, with that of our other factories, and former Accts. from the

fort you are at, . . . we have therefore ordered that you shall be removed to York Fort,
and their, to be under the direction of Governor. Macklish, which we are certain, will
be very much to your advantage, and improvement, in the knowledge of our Trade and
Accounts.59

Anthony Beale, Norton's replacement, was able to reverse the net
returns. When he died in 1731, he was replaced by Thomas Bird and
three months later by Richard Norton once again, who was to maintain
the level of net returns.

Although the level of net returns for a post provided information
about a manager's performance, the size of the overplus and expenses
for any post was affected directly by the amount of competition the
company faced. An alternative measure was to look at the total return

for the post in comparison to the merchandise exported to that post.
Thus a post could have had a low net return due to intense competition,
which would have lowered the overplus and raised expenses, but still
have a reasonable terms-of-trade index between the fur return and the

trade goods supplied. The policy was that a certain quantity of trade
goods should receive a given quantity of furs in return. In Table 2 we
have calculated such an index for the Eastmain and Albany factories for

the decade 1804 to 1814. The existence of the official and comparative
standards allow all fur returns and all trade goods to be denominated in
Made Beaver equivalents. The standard used is that for 1801. The
Ibid., p. 121.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

872 Carlos and Nicholas
TABLE 2

COMPARISON OF TRADING PERFORMANCE
Ratio of Beaver Returns to Merchandise Exported
Albany Factory Eastmain Factory
1804

2.3

2.3

1805

2.1

2.1

1806

2.0

2.6

1807

1.8

2.0

1808

1.9

1.8

1809

1.5

1.1

1810

3.9

2.1

1813

3.1

1.3

1814

4.9

Notes: The ratios are denominated in "Made Beaver" equivalents. A Made Beaver was the
standard unit of account employed by the Hudson's Bay Company. A Made Beaver was the value
of a prime beaver skin. All furs and trade goods were given a Made Beaver equivalent.
Source: Public Archives of Canada HBC MG20A53, MG20A25. Fur returns are missing for 1811
and are incomplete for 1812.

indices for each factor show a similar pattern of decline to 1810, then

Eastmain and Albany diverge. In 1810 John Hodson was informed that
he was no longer employed as chief trader at Albany, the committee
writing that "for some time past there has been a want of that activity
and vigour which can alone retrieve the hitherto declining trade from

your parts."60 The committee also expressed concern over the management of the Eastmain Factory. The response to the continuing decline of
the index at Eastmain was to change its status from that of an

independent factory to that of the trading district under Moose Factory.
These examples show how the accounting systems were used to
monitor behavior and the flexibility of the committee in handling cases.
The committee did not assume automatically that its managers were
trying to defraud the company. The effectiveness of these monitoring

and control systems improved over the eighteenth century, not just
because the London Committee gained experience and improved their
record keeping but because the committee tried to create an environment in which managers were less likely to cheat.
A Social System

We argued earlier that if firms can create an ethical system to which
the managers conform, the necessity for close monitoring will be
lessened. In a family concern such a social system can be created by

making family members partners and managers of the various plants.61
Although the Hudson's Bay Company was not a family concern, the

60 London Correspondence Outward-QJficial, Public Archives of Canada, Hudson's B
pany MG2OA6 (Albany, 1810).

61 A very good history and analysis of such a family concern can be found in Douglas McCalla,
The Upper Canada Trade, 1834-1872: A Study of the Buchanans' Business (Toronto, 1979).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 873
directors definitely tried to create a social system in which the managers
and workers were made to feel part of a family. The attempt to create a
"family environment" was particularly evident during the French wars
when the committee wrote:
[A]nd for the better encouragement of your men in their Duty Wee doe hereby promise
and assure you and them, that Wee will take Care by way of Pension for such of them
as haveing behaved themselves with Courage and fidelity shalbe wounded and the

Wives and Children of those whoe shall happen to bee killed in our Services ... be
Confident that noe brave action pformed in defence or recovery of any places or
Factoryes shall passe ungratifyed.62

Indeed, all the correspondence is replete with positive encouragement to the men and managers, commenting on their work, commending them, and rewarding them with the large gratuities mentioned
earlier.
A homogeneous social group was created when the London Committee's search for a labor force led to the hiring of Orcadians. As well as
hiring suitable servants, the committee also tried to ensure that it would
have suitable managers. The committee needed people who could
manage the labor force and trade for furs and were sufficiently educated
that they could keep the account books and post journals. The men who
were promoted from the ranks were very often able traders but fell short

on the other two counts. In fact, the committee took the trading ability

of the men from the ranks as a base, believing that more suitable
managers should be able to do better. To this end the committee started
to indenture apprentices. In 1689 the company sent four apprentices
from Christ's Hospital in London to Hudson Bay. These "Blue Coat
Boys" were educated in writing and arithmetic and usually started in the
company at the age of 14, although John Hindson, a "Parish boy" from
Essex, is said to have started as young as eight. In the general letter of
1689 the committee described its view of these apprentices:

[T]hey all write faire haudes and Cast accompts, and being young will easily attaine the
Lingua and bee trained up in our service and if you think such Ladds may bee useful in
a few years to send up with the Indians wee have thoughts yearely or every other year

to take the like or a greater number from the said Hospital.63

By the end of the eighteenth century it was from this group that many

of the company's major officers, including Henry Kelsey and Richard
Norton, regularly came. Indeed, recent work by Jennifer Brown confirmed that the company actively pursued a policy directed toward

creating a set of shared values and apparently was successful in this.64
62 Rich, ed., Hudson's Bay Copy Booke, vol. 20, p. 51.
63 Ibid., p. 79; and Davies, ed., Letters fiom Hudson Bay, vol. 25, p. 76.
64 Jennifer Brown, Strangers in Blood: Fur Trade Company Families in Indian Country
(Vancouver, 1980).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

874 Carlos and Nicholas
Not only did the Hudson's Bay Company actively try to create a
managerial class with a set of shared values, it encouraged any
complaints that its managers might have concerning the behavior of
peers or supervisors. The company tried to create a moral code
governing both private and work behavior and encouraged managers to
report on each other. A recurring theme in the eighteenth-century
correspondence was the number of men who were recalled to London to
answer questions concerning their moral conduct or alleged private
trade on the basis of complaints by other employees. Examples of this
abound. In 1685, when Governor Sargeant accused James Knight, chief
factor at Albany and deputy governor at the Bay, of private trade,
Knight was called to London to answer the charges. Three years later
Radisson accused Governor Geyer of the same and Geyer too was
brought home to answer the charges. In the 1730s chief factor Macklish
had to go to England to explain how he had trapped so many furs, and

in 1745 chief factor Isham was called to London in regard to private
trade and his general behavior.65 In some cases the answers were found
satisfactory and in others not. But the committee made it very clear that
it was willing to listen before it acted.
A social system has positive and negative attributes. Insofar as managers
perceived themselves to be part of a "family," opportunistic behavior was

mitigated. Of course, such a system was open to abuse by managers when
reporting meant that diligent managers would be called home and supervision would be more lax. However, the company often replaced recalled
managers with personnel from other posts, providing the London Com-

mittee with an independent auditing of work practices at that post.
CONCLUSION

The motivation behind this article came from the generalized statements found in the literature that one of the major problems facing

chartered companies was that of private trade by their own managers.
We have examined the issue of private trade for one of these chartered

companies, the Hudson's Bay Company, which saw private trade as a
serious problem and tried to eradicate it by employing a range of
strategies to deal with the problem.

One device was the formal contract structure. High real wages and large
gratuities paid by the company increased the opportunity cost of losing
one's position because of private trade and so should have reduced the
level of opportunism. The company also required that its managers take an
oath swearing that they would not engage in private trade and reinforced
these oaths by requiring that the managers post large bonds that would be
lost if the person was found to have engaged in private trade. Again these
strategies should have helped to reduce the level of opportunistic behavior.
65 Rich, The Historv of the Hudson's Bay Company, vol. 1, pp. 182, 259, 543, 546.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company 875
Nevertheless, high salaries, gratuities, bonds, and oaths need not have
reduced the level of private trade if managers believed there existed little
possibility of being caught and losing their salary.
A second approach was to monitor the activities of its managers. This
was done through such straightforward monitoring devices as searching
incoming and outgoing ships and the men's baggage for illicit trade
goods or furs and reading men's letters for any information concerning
possible private trade. Again such activity on the company's part should
have reduced the level of private trade by managers. The company also

monitored its managers' activities by putting into place a set of internal
control mechanisms designed to account for the use of all trade goods
sent to Hudson Bay. To this end the managers were required to follow
rigorous standards in the maintenance of post records and in particular
of all account books. Through these records the company could monitor
the trading activity of individual managers, and, as we argued, devise
indices based on the accounts to be used as monitoring devices. Such
close scrutiny of managerial activity should have helped further to
reduce the level of private trade.

Finally the company attempted to reduce the level of private trade by
creating a social structure within the company, the mores of which
dictated against such behavior. The Hudson's Bay Company tried to
engender the view of the company as family and to create the existence
of a set of shared values. Both the policy of hiring lower-level workers
solely from the Orkney Islands and of apprenticing boys from Christ's
College in London to form a future managerial class helped to create a
"family" structure. The more successful was this policy, the less likely
was private trade to occur.
The physical environment in which the company operated with its
limited access and few contact points with the outside enhanced the
likelihood that a strategy for controlling private trade would succeed. It
is unlikely, however, that any strategy would have succeeded alone.

More likely, success depended on the application of a judicious mixture
of all the policies described earlier. The Hudson's Bay Company treated

its managers well, especially by the standards of the time, and kept a
watchful eye on what was happening in each of its posts, but did all of
this in the context of a "caring" environment. The social structure
which the company created was, we would argue, an integral part of its

ability to attenuate opportunistic behavior by its managers. All of this
suggests that the Hudson's Bay Company had succeeded in controlling
private trade by the end of the eighteenth century. The company is still

in operation today, suggesting that it was able to exert enough control
over opportunistic behavior to remain viable. Survivorship gives a
lower bound on success and in subsequent work we anticipate being
able to provide a better quantitative assessment of those efforts.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:36 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


