---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Marked by Fire: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood in Treaty Making with the
United States and Canada
Author(s): Heidi Kiiwetinepinesiik Stark
Source: American Indian Quarterly , Vol. 36, No. 2 (Spring 2012), pp. 119-149
Published by: University of Nebraska Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5250/amerindiquar.36.2.0119
Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood in Treaty
Making with the United States and Canada

heidi kiiwetinepinesiik stark

Nenabozho was being brought up by his grandmother.1
And so by and by he said to his grandmother: “Don’t you know of a
place where there are some people.”
“Yes,” he was told by his grandmother. “In yonder direction on the farther shore of the sea are some people.”
“I am curious to know if they do not possess fire.”
“Yes,” he was told by his grandmother; “they do possess some fire.”
Upon this revelation, Nenabozho said that he would go and try to fetch
some of that fire. His grandmother warned him that it would be a difficult task, one that he would likely not succeed in. But Nenabozho was
determined.
Now this was what he then said afterward: “I will that the sea shall freeze,
as thick as the birch-bark covering of the lodge so let this sea freeze.”
It was true that it happened as he had said.
“Now, this is the way I shall look,” he said. “I will that I become a hare.”
So accordingly that truly was the way he looked.
Nenabozho had conjured a method for acquiring fire. Across the water, an old man sat constantly working on his net. As the old man had two
daughters, Nenabozho thought he would transform himself into a hare,
knowing the young girls would take to him in that form. And with this
thought, he willed it to be. Then he thought that the lake would freeze, and
thus it was so. Nenabozho ran across this lake. He willed those young girls
to come find him and to take him into their home. And so it was. The girls
placed Nenabozho by the fire so that he could dry. Yet their loud giggling
alarmed their father, who came to investigate what his daughters were up to.
“Beware!” they were told by their father. “Have you not heard of the
manitous how they were born?2 Perhaps this might be one of them.”

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

When he heard these words of caution, Nenabozho knew he needed to
act quickly. He willed a spark of that fire to jump onto him, and so it was.
And thus he leaped out the window and began running across the frozen
lake. The old man pursued him, but to no avail. Nenabozho ran quickly and
soon returned home. But he was much on fire. He pleaded to his grandmother to rub the fire off of him, and she did. And thus they had fire. Yet
Nenabozho was marked by this quest. His white fur had turned brown,
scorched from carrying the fire across the lake. And so Nenabozho proclaimed, “Therefore such shall be the look of the hare in the summer-time.”3

marked by fire: defining anishinaabe nationhood
The story, known as “The Theft of Fire,” illustrates numerous meanings
and teachings crucial to understanding Anishinaabe nationhood. This
story contains two discernible points. First, it reveals how the Anishinaabe obtained fire.4 Fire, ishkode, is a central element in the Anishinaabe worldview. Ishkode is the force of the creation of the Earth, reflected in the Earth’s molten core. This relationship of fire to creation
is, furthermore, mapped in the sky by the northern lights—“jiibayag
niimi’idiwag” (they are the northern lights).5 The northern lights are
considered to be reflections of the ancestors’ fires, illuminating the
path of souls traveling to the land of the deceased.6 Anishinaabe folk
etymologies have often identified ishkode as the heart of the Earth and
of the people and point out its apparent inclusion of the morpheme
ode’, meaning “heart.”7 Thus fire appears as a central element that begins with the creation of the Earth, becomes the heart of the nation,
and lights the way “home.”8 Fire, then, appears throughout the cycle of
creation, or life.
The centrality of fire within the Anishinaabe worldview is illustrated
by its importance in ceremonial practices. Fire is a vital component in
many ceremonial practices, which begin with the lighting of a fire and
end with its extinguishment. Fire also serves as a conduit to the spirit
realm both through the smoke it emits and the items it burns. Fire has
the power to carry the prayers and offerings of the Anishinaabe to this
realm.9 However, spiritual practice and discourse are not the only arenas
in which fire, in both form and symbol, are invoked. Fire has also functioned as a powerful metaphor within political discourse.
Within Anishinaabe political discourse, fire has been employed as
120

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

a symbolic representation for a variety of concepts, including nation,
council, and alliance.10 This usage is evident in the various names applied to the allied Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi: the Three Fires Confederacy, the Council of Three Fires, People of the Three Fires, and the
United Nation(s) of Chippewa, Ottawa, and Potawatomi.11 Each nation
represents a fire—the use of “Three Fires” to demarcate their alliance.
This application of the symbol of fire to connote both a nation and an
alliance between nations (obtained through a treaty with one another)
was expressed in the 1846 treaty negotiations between the United States
and the “United Nation of Chippewas, Odawa, and Pottawatommie.”12
The Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi leaders represented themselves
as tied to one another. However, they strategically asserted that they
could not exclusively be seen as a single people. During treaty negotiations, they reminded the treaty commissioners that the president “cannot collect them,” referencing his inability to make them one people. Yet
the Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi argued that if the president agreed
to their terms, outlined in the treaty, then he would “see how many fires
will burn”; in this instance, fire operates as an allegory for both the individual nations and the council these nations would collect in to meet
the agreements of this treaty.13
Interestingly, the United Nation of Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi
were referenced in the treaty as the Potawatomi, with the treaty records
stating that this was their “national character.” The treaty record does
not indicate why the United Nation of Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi became identified as the Potawatomi. Perhaps this name was used
because a large number of Potawatomi made up the United Nation.
However, maybe this collective identity was utilized for another reason.
The word “Potawatomi,” boodewaadamii in the Anishinaabe language,
means “those who keep the fire.”14 Thus, this collective identity may
have been utilized to denote the political alliance across these three nations, their making of a fire.
The second discernible feature within this story is the marking of
the hare by his theft of fire. On one level, this component of the story
serves to explain animal features. It explains why some hares are brown
in the summer and white in the winter. However, the effects of Nenabozho’s theft of the fire, its mark on the hare, can also inform Anishinaabe political discourse. While fire serves to represent nationhood and
treaty making (alliance formation), the hare illustrates how nations are
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

121

defined and are in turn marked by their treaties and alliances.15 When
a nation enters into an alliance or treaty, it retains its separate, distinct
identity in the same way that the hare retains his white fur in the winter. Nonetheless, a nation is also marked or shaped by its alliances with
other nations in the same way that the hare in this story is marked by
the quest for fire, having brown fur in the summer. Interestingly, both
fur colors help hares to adapt and blend into their changing environment.16 Anishinaabe nationhood and the alliances that they established
operated to achieve the same end: the ability to adjust and integrate into
an ever-changing environment. Both serve as mechanisms of protection. Understood in these ways, The Theft of Fire reveals a worldview
that both influences and informs Anishinaabe social, spiritual, and political discourse. As Thomas King pithily reminds us, “The truth about
stories is that that’s all we are.”17
Stories shape how we see and interact with the world. They lend insight into the ways in which we see our communities as well as how we
see ourselves within these communities. How, when, and in which context stories are told is as telling of the people as the stories themselves.
Julie Cruikshank finds that these sources serve as windows to how the
past is constructed and discussed.18 I argue that stories can serve as a
theoretical and methodological lens with which to interpret the treaty
record. The historical record of Anishinaabe treaty making with the
United States and Canada can not only lend insight into what was said,
the promises and commitments made between the various parties, it
can also shed light on the hopes and aspirations these nations had for
their people. Diplomacy was carried out through the stories told, the
customs practiced, and the commitments fulfilled. Treaty making is in
many ways the site of nation building, both real and envisioned, what
nations were and what they hoped to become.19
This article examines Anishinaabe articulations of their nationhood
when they engaged in treaty making with the United States and Canada
in the nineteenth century. Anishinaabe leaders often sought recognition
and protection of their nationhood, and thus their sovereignty and land
tenure, by engaging with the United States and Canada in treaty making
that they hoped would guarantee their status as sovereigns and as proprietors. Throughout the nineteenth century, Anishinaabe articulations
of nationhood were varied and complex. A dense web of clans, kinship ties, and loyalties to non-Anishinaabe nations existed within na122

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

tionhood, not as forces that opposed it. These overlapping networks, to
which access to land was crucial, were far more complex than the American or Canadian federal governments wished. They frustrated American and Canadian efforts to impose fixed land boundaries, obtain land
cessions, and divide Native nations internally and from one another. In
fact, Anishinaabe leaders utilized their alliances to resist the imposition
of “fixed” boundaries that tied nationhood to territorial containment.
The term nation and its application to Native peoples has received
a great deal of attention, both within and outside of the field of Indigenous studies.20 Taiaiake Alfred, in Peace, Power, Righteousness, examines
the various political struggles facing Indigenous peoples in their quest
to regain self-determination. He points out that “indigenous nationhood is about reconstructing a power base for the assertion of control
over Native land and life.” Alfred recognizes that “traditional indigenous
nationhood stands in sharp contrast to the dominant understanding of
‘the state’: there is no absolute authority, no coercive enforcement of decisions, no hierarchy, and no separate ruling entity.”21
While some scholars conflate the term nation with state, they are not
synonymous.22 As David Wilkins notes, a nation is “a social group which
shares a common ideology, common institutions and customs, and a
sense of homogeneity; controls a territory viewed as a national homeland; and has a belief in common ancestry.” More importantly, Wilkins
astutely contends that “a prerequisite of nationhood is an awareness or
belief that one’s own group is unique in a most vital sense; therefore, the
essence of a nation is not tangible but psychological, a matter of attitude
rather than of fact.”23
This sentiment is echoed by Alfred in his description of Mohawk nationhood. He maintains that “‘Mohawk’ and ‘nationhood’ are inseparable. Both are simply about being. Being is who you are, and a sense of
who you are is arrived at through your relationships with other people—
your people. So who we are is tied with what we are: a nation.”24 Creek
scholar Craig Womack similarly asserts that “a key component of nationhood is a people’s idea of themselves, their imagining of who they are.”25
Anishinaabe conceptions of nationhood were and remain expressly
linked to their inherent constructions of their identity. During the
treaty era their sense of national identity was shaped and constructed by
the stories, ceremonies, and practices that ordered Anishinaabe life. Anishinaabe political consciousness, for instance, is illustrated in the story
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

123

of the theft of fire as well as in the declarations and expressions of their
nationhood throughout their treaty negotiations with the United States
and Canada. These articulations are the stories of Anishinaabe nationhood. Like Nenabozho, the Anishinaabe transformed themselves, adapting to their ever-changing environment. Importantly, the stories maintained about Nenabozho often conveyed the importance of change.
Anishinaabe nationhood has never been static or fixed. Indeed, no nation can or has survived without undergoing constant change. The Anishinaabe, like the hare, would retain their preexisting political formations and practices yet would also be marked by their engagement with
other nations, namely, the United States and Canada. The Anishinaabe
have always engaged in the process of transformation, understanding
what nationhood has meant for their people while carefully and strategically shifting what it would become, expressing who they were while
envisioning what they would be.
“ an improper interference ” :
negotiating anishinaabe nationhood
Beyond recognizing a collective identity, the Anishinaabe comprise distinct, separate nations (frequently referred to as bands) that span a vast
geographic region from the Plains to the Great Lakes.26 They are historically and today a people who cross many political and geographical
borders. Anishinaabe people share many beliefs and practices, yet individual nations are influenced by their particular histories, geographic
locations, political relationships, and internal conflicts. Anishinaabe nations often entered into treaty negotiations together and chose to express their sovereignty and land tenure through a unified voice. At the
same time, Anishinaabe leaders and their treaties with the United States
and Canada expressly recognized the separate, distinct interests each nation maintained to the territory under negotiation. An examination of
this moment of western “nation building”—as the United States and
Canada sought to establish their national status and expand their land
base—can reveal how the Anishinaabe utilized this diplomatic forum
to assert their own conceptions of nationhood while resisting US and
Canadian containment and diminishment of their national character,
sovereignty, and land tenure.
Today, many Native nations look to their treaties as the external rec124

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ognition of their national character, inherent sovereignty, and reserved
rights. Treaty making is a site where the competing conceptions of and
claims to sovereignty, nationhood, and land tenure are simultaneously
recognized and negotiated. As Joanne Barker has noted, “Nations recognized each other’s status as nations by entering into treaties with each
other.”27 Treaty making was the primary apparatus utilized among nations to recognize each other’s national character. International law—
defined through the colonial enterprise of territorial expansion and
land acquisition—was predicated upon the recognition of treaties as
diplomatic agreements between nations.28 Barker argues that “the two
primary vehicles that served for the articulation of international legal
precepts about nationhood, and so of the sovereignty with which such
a character was defined, were the national constitution and the treaty.”
She finds that “custom within international law emerged around the
treaty as a mechanism for both the exercise of nationhood and the recognition of national sovereignty.”29
Anishinaabe leaders often sought recognition and protection of their
nationhood, and thus their sovereignty and land tenure, by engaging
with the United States and Canada in treaty making that they hoped
would guarantee their status as sovereigns and as proprietors. During
the treaty-making process the very meanings attributed to the terms
sovereignty and nationhood were literally being negotiated. Furthermore,
treaty making, while having been a long-standing tradition in North
America, was also undergoing significant changes. While European nations had “claimed” territories in the seventeenth century, they had limited control over these lands, and the boundaries were largely fictional.
Instead, a fluid set of evolving relationships controlled what happened
on the ground. The Anishinaabe utilized their long-standing diplomatic
practices, which sought to establish and renew relationships that integrated newcomers into the Anishinaabe polity. These practices were also
advantageous for nations such as France and Britain, which sought to
incorporate the Anishinaabe as “loyal subjects.” While the motives of
France and Britain differed from those of the Anishinaabe, the practice
on the ground was the same; they each sought to build relationships
that tied each to the other.
In contrast, by the nineteenth century, federal Indian policies in the
United States and Canada sought to keep Native peoples geographically and politically separate. Indeed, treaties now specifically marked
out territories, connecting land cessions to diplomacy in a way that had
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

125

not largely existed before. Treaties had previously been utilized by the
United States to establish peace and alliances with American Indians nations. By the nineteenth century the treaty process was primarily used as
the vehicle for acquiring land. The United States saw itself in distinctly
new ways, articulating a national identity through the creation and expansion of the nation-state. Treaty making in Canada followed a similar
imperative as the state sought to duplicate western expansion north of
the forty-ninth parallel. A critical analysis of the process that gave rise to
these diplomatic accords can unearth how the Anishinaabe were negotiating this transformation in the treaty process.
Throughout the nineteenth century, Anishinaabe articulations of nationhood were varied and complex. They sought to mitigate the impacts
that US and Canadian nation building would have on their own exercise
of nationhood. The Anishinaabe strategically resisted US and Canadian
imposition of Western constructions of nationhood that sought to fix
and define Anishinaabe national character and rights. Instead, Anishinaabe leaders expressed their own notions of nationhood, which remained flexible and inclusive. They sought to recognize and incorporate
their ever-shifting web of relationships, which shaped individual and
collective rights and transcended national lines.
Anishinaabe political identity was layered in the nineteenth century
and shaped their expressions of nationhood with the United States and
Canada. The Anishinaabe were broken into distinct and autonomous
Anishinaabe bands and villages, yet they also recognized themselves as
members of the larger Algonquian collective.30 This is evidenced in the
speeches of Anishinaabe leaders. For example, Chief Flatmouth, at the
1837 treaty negotiations, stated:
My father, I shall say but little to you at this time. I am called a
Chief. I am not a Chief of the whole nation, but only of my people
or tribe. I speak to you now only because I see nobody else ready
to do so. I do not wish to take any further steps about what you
have proposed to us, until the other people arrive, who have been
expected here. They have not yet come; and to do so before their
arrival, might be considered an improper interference, and unfair
towards them.31
In addition, the clan system shaped Anishinaabe political identity.
In her study of the Anishinaabe clan system in the seventeenth century,
126

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Heidi Bohaker found that “they conceived of themselves as related to
and having kin obligations toward those who shared the same otherthan-human progenitor being.”32 For example, members of the bear
clan saw themselves as related to all others who belonged to the bear
clan. This system of kinship carried with it certain responsibilities and
obligations that facilitated alliances across national boundaries. The
clan system remained a critical component of Anishinaabe identity in
the nineteenth century and shaped who could access resources and exercise rights.
Connections other than the clan system in the seventeenth century
and through the nineteenth century also shaped and facilitated Anishinaabe access to resources and rights. For example, the geographical features of their location also identified Anishinaabe nations. Bohaker states,
“In addition to their nindoodemag, Anishinaabe peoples had a sense of
themselves as members of a small, extended family band who wintered
together, as well as a large group of people who inhabited the same region or area (quarter) during the summer season.”33 Furthermore, Anishinaabe nations had long established alliances with their neighbors,
who were at times culturally and politically distinct nations. These relationships were often facilitated around practices that reinforced kinship,
such as marriage and adoption.34 Bohaker notes that “these alliances and
networks offer important insights into the relationship between geographic space and collective identity; these insights can be understood by
observing how people made use of and traveled through the land.” She
finds that “in the eastern Great Lakes region, the question of who had access to which land and to which resources, who could pass freely through
a given space, and who was subject to taxes or tolls was answered by a
complex nexus of kinship connections and alliances. People respected
ownership and proprietorship rights of other groups.”35
Kinship assisted in the development of shared access to areas of land
as well as political, economic, and social alliances. The clan and other
social systems allowed Anishinaabe people to operate across national
borders, both political and territorial. In his examination of the social
construction of space and identity in the Great Lakes during the seventeenth century, Anishinaabe historian Michael Witgen found that as Algonquian “national” identities took shape, “they remained flexible and
even interchangeable”:
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

127

The flexibility of social identities that connected these people to
one another made the Algonquian country literally like a web. Real
and fictive kinship, established through trade, language, and intermarriage, intersected and crisscrossed over a vast space. These ties
made it possible to hunt, fish, and harvest rice, corn, and sugar,
but access to these resources shifted across time with trade and
kinship.36
Witgen argues that the individual and collective flexibility of political
autonomy confounded colonial officials who sought to encode Native
communities as nations.
By the nineteenth century, US and Canadian officials remained perplexed by the complexities of kinship as they sought to apply Western
constructions of nationhood onto the Anishinaabe. Anishinaabe national political autonomy coalesced around a land tenure system that
allowed for extended kin to access territories and resources. Kinship,
often coupled with a shared identity framed by language, stories, and
practices, allowed Anishinaabe nations to facilitate alliances across national lines with other Anishinaabe and Native nations. These alliances
became critical for the Anishinaabe in the nineteenth century as they
sought to assert their nationhood and land tenure in the face of US and
Canadian expansion.
Throughout their treaty negotiations, Anishinaabe leaders sought
to express their own conceptions of nationhood, which recognized the
political autonomy of each nation, while simultaneously acknowledging their preexisting and ever-expanding social relationships, which dictated territory and resource access across national lines. Numerous Anishinaabe and other Native nations came together to enter into treaties,
as these agreements would affect their preexisting relationships. The
web of relationships that operated across Anishinaabe nations troubled
some treaty commissioners who preferred to dismiss or disregard Anishinaabe sociopolitical formations. Instead, US and Canadian treaty
commissioners sometimes conflated Anishinaabe groups into a single
polity, neglecting to account for the individual autonomy of Anishinaabe citizens and their nations, seeking to contain and define Anishinaabe nationhood in Western terms. This greatly conflicted with Anishinaabe notions of nationhood, which remained flexible and inclusive.
Anishinaabe nationhood allowed for the political autonomy of individ128

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

uals and nations, which in turn adhered to cultural practices and values
that encouraged accountability for the welfare of the collective.37
Anishinaabe leaders, often careful to assert their own conceptions of
nationhood, which recognized preexisting social and political relationships and alliances in operation, strategically resisted US and Canadian
restrictions of their national character and rights in varied and numerous ways. At times, Anishinaabe leaders utilized their alliances to resist
the imposition of “fixed” boundaries that tied nationhood to territorial
containment and by continuously asserting themselves as having “one
mind.” However, these nations were also cautious to recognize the autonomy of each group, and when a joint treaty no longer served the interests of the participating nations, they often asserted their desires for
separate treaties. These varied moments are equally informative about
how the Anishinaabe were constructing and asserting their nationhood
and land tenure in the face of US and Canadian national expansion.
“ we do not need any line ” : anishinaabe resistance
to “ fixing ” the nation and its borders
Nationhood is often, though not always, connected to territorial boundaries. The United States and Canada had an interest in establishing and
fixing the borders of various First Nations, often emphasizing that fixed
boundaries would resolve numerous conflicts that occurred “on the
ground.” Yet Anishinaabe leaders sought to resist these constrictions, instead articulating their own flexible conceptions of nationhood. Thus
the attempts by these two states to establish and fix Anishinaabe boundaries often resulted in Anishinaabe assertions of their preexisting relations with other nations, which would be affected by these arbitrary
lines. These expressions demonstrate how kinship operated across national lines, binding autonomous nations in their obligations to others.
In August 1825 numerous Native Nations assembled at Prairie du
Chien “to establish boundaries for the purpose of promoting peace
among those tribes of Indians.” Gen. William Clark articulated US motivations at the outset of the proceedings, which brought together numerous nations (particularly the Anishinaabe and the Dakota) who had
been formerly engaged in warfare with one another. Clark stated, “Children, Your great Father has not sent us here to ask anything from you—
we want nothing, not the smallest piece of your land, not a single article
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

129

of your property—we have come a great way to meet you for your own
good and not for our benefit.”38
Contrary to Clark’s words, the United States did have an explicit interest in preventing warfare and establishing boundaries between these
various nations. Establishing boundaries would expedite US land acquisition by creating neat land parcels and providing a map that the United
States could utilize to attain land through the cession treaties that would
follow. Peace between these nations also would encourage US settlement west, as expansion had been slowed by US citizens’ fear of these
“warring tribes.”
General Clark explicitly connected warfare with a lack of boundaries.
He argued, “Your hostilities have resulting in a great measure from you
having no defined boundaries established in your county your tribes do
not know what belongs to them & your people thus follow the game
into the lands claimed by other tribes.”39 His statement failed to take
into account the complex nexus of relationships that dictated access on
the ground. The truth was more complicated. Warfare between these
nations often resulted from there being explicitly defined boundaries, as
Native nations challenged one another’s claims.
As the Anishinaabe did not have an extensive shared identity with the
Dakota based on language and customs, their kin relationships were facilitated primarily through adoption and marriage. In addition, Anishinaabe and Dakota nations often entered into temporary peace agreements in the winter months to allow for hunting across a “shared” or
border region.40 Nonetheless, warfare was an active means for nations
to increase their land base, pushing against their neighbors. In the same
ways that kinship promoted alliances across national lines, obligations
to the deceased perpetuated Native warfare across this region, often disrupting social, spiritual, economic, and political alliances in effect across
these nations. Thus warfare between these nations had less to do with
hunting excursions into neighboring territories and more to do with
kin responsibilities.
Clark nonetheless focused on national boundaries and predicted
that “this cause will be removed by the establishment of boundaries
which shall be known to you & which boundaries we must establish
at this council fire.” The Anishinaabe, and indeed the other Native nations gathered at this conference, had varied responses to Clark’s desire
to fix boundaries. During the second day of negotiations, many lead130

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ers chose not to respond. Nonetheless, an Anishinaabe chief, The Wind,
responded to Clark’s request by stating, “I wish to live in peace—But
in running marks round our country or in giving it to our enemies it
may make new disturbances and breed new wars.” Another Anishinaabe
leader, Shimgaubaw’Assin, echoed this sentiment.41 Treaty commissioner Lewis Cass responded to these chiefs’ concerns for establishing
boundaries by asserting the president’s willingness to ensure peace between these nations with force if necessary.
Some Anishinaabe chiefs were willing to demarcate boundaries for
their lands. Pee-a-guck, an Anishinaabe chief from Saint Croix River,
outlined his boundaries, stating, “This is the land I claim for myself &
my children.” He followed his speech by presenting a map on birch bark
that delineated his people’s territory. Yet others were unwilling to acquiesce to US impositions on Anishinaabe nationhood that sought to
establish fixed boundaries. White Cloud, an Iowa chief, stated, “My Fathers, I claim no land in particular. The land I live on is enough to furnish my women & children—I go upon the lands of our friends the Socs
& Focs—we alternate go upon each others land—why should we quarrel about land when we get enough on what we have.”42
White Cloud’s speech demonstrates the complex relationship between nationhood (the political autonomy of the nation) and land tenure (which encompassed the rights of kin and allies to access resources
across national lines), which did not easily fit into US desires to establish rigid boundaries. White Cloud specifically connected land rights to
common ancestry:
The Socs Foxs Winnebagos Menomines Chippawas & Pattawatomies are links of the same people—I speak for them as well as
for myself My Fathers you see people here apparently of different
nations but we are all one. You Socs, Foxes, Winnebago & Menomines—we are one people—we have but one council fire & eat
out of the same dish.43
White Cloud utilized the kinship relationships in operation across these
nations to resist US interference.
Pumpkin, another Iowa chief, elaborated on the words of White
Cloud, stating, “My heart is in the right place—I live with my relations
the Socs & Foxes—I have no reason to deny my Brethern.” He followed
up these words by presenting a map drawn by White Cloud. The archiStark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

131

val record unfortunately does not discuss this map in any detail; therefore, it is unknown whether the map encompassed the land of these
various nations present or referenced particular claims of the Iowa nation. However, White Cloud’s and Pumpkin’s speeches were followed
by speeches from Winnebago chief Co-ra-mo-nse, who declared that
some portions of land were held in common and claimed by multiple
groups present, noting that it would be difficult to divide these lands.44
Co-ra-mo-nse followed this speech with a brief discussion of individual ownership of lodges and gardens and elaborated that the rivers were
common property of all these nations and not the exclusive use of only
one.45 While he spoke of their common rights to areas, access and regulation of these territories were negotiated through alliances across these
nations. These nations simultaneously had distinct, separate interests in
land as well as “shared territories.”46
Land tenure was a complex set of practices and regulations carried
out at the individual, local, national, and international levels. This is
evident in the varied assertions of land tenure laid out throughout the
treaty era. The Anishinaabe recognized and expressed the rights of an
individual or family to a specific tract of land, group rights, and areas
that were “shared” with numerous nations, along with other articulations of land tenure.
Across and within Native nations, multiple forms of ownership and
usufructuary rights existed, and access was determined through a nexus
of relationships. This was exemplified in the words of Gambler, an
Odaawa chief who spoke about the Three Fires confederacy:
We Three nations Chippewa Pottawatomies and Ottawas have
but one council fire—My Fathers You spoke about Lands we
travel about in search of [Game (transcription uncertain; might
be “Same”)]—we also have lands. I never yet heard from my ancestors that any one had an exclusive right to the soil—my chiefs
are now in council on that subject and their minds will be made
known to you. You (addressing Gov. Cass) know the situation of
our Lands & that it would be difficult to divide them—you know
we have always listened to your council.47
When pressed on which territories each nation claimed, the leaders
gathered at Prairie du Chien were able to elaborate on their territorial
boundaries. Dispute primarily rested along border regions, buffer zones
132

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

between the various nations, that were accessed by both nations.48 The
difficulty in establishing boundaries expressed by chiefs throughout the
Prairie du Chien negotiations perhaps rests more in the system of fixing
boundaries on maps that ignored the kinship and sociopolitical systems
in place. These relationships enabled various Native nations to exercise a
land tenure that, though highly regulated, was flexible to the obligations
and responsibilities that kinship carried across national boundaries.
The Menominee chief, Grisly Bear, spoke about kinship obligations
when he discussed his claim to land. “But it’s so small that we can’t
turn round without touching our neighbors,” he observed. “But we
travel about a great deal and go where there is game among the Nations
around—who do not restrain us from doing so.”49 His speech demonstrates that the Menominee recognized that their neighbors could prevent them from accessing game and resources, but they did not. Kinship
and sociopolitical obligations were addressed throughout various treaty
negotiations when the treaty of Prairie du Chien was referenced. However, the kinship and sociopolitical obligations that motivated some Native nations to allow access into their territories also served to prevent
access into their lands and often led to warfare, most prevalently seen
between the Anishinaabe and the Dakota.
The establishment of a line between the Anishinaabe and the Dakota
at Prairie du Chien did not end their previous troubles, as US treaty
commissioners had suggested it would. Various Anishinaabe chiefs
raised concerns regarding these boundaries and their relations with the
Dakota after the Treaty of Prairie du Chien was signed. During the August 5, 1826, treaty negotiations, an unnamed chief stated, “I, and these
for whom I speak, thank you Father that the line between us and the
Sioux is Established. The Sioux also, rejoice that this difficulty is settled.
Father The tomahawk is buried by us in the ground.” This chief however, went on to state, “But I find it hard to bury it in my heart.” He discussed the treatment faced by his people at the hands of the Dakota, distraught that a young warrior had his gun broken in his face on his own
land by a Dakota. Another chief followed by stating, “Father When I was
at the city beyond the Hills, much was said about peace. But between the
Sioux and us, there seems to be no peace.” He continued, “We all reflect
much on the line.”50 The United States’ desire to fix Anishinaabe and
other Native nations’ boundaries had not achieved its desired outcome.
Making lines onto the land would not eradicate tribal tensions nor resolve their grievances against the United States and Canada.
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

133

Other chiefs at this 1826 treaty negotiation expressed their hope in
the creation of national boundaries. Chief Maw-zaw-zid stated: “Father
We thank our Great Father, that he has been pleased to put our lands in
a body. So are the hearts of those rejoiced, whom we call our enemies.”
Chief Maw-zaw-zid explicitly connected his hope in these boundaries
with Anishinaabe relations with the United States: “We bid the advancement and prosperity of the American nation, welcome to our country.
We hope the Great Spirit will put strength into their arms, that they may
put them out and take us by the hand.”51 Maw-zaw-zid’s speech may be
less about territorial boundaries and instead indicate his hope and desire in the treaty relationship his nation was establishing with the United
States. Anishinaabe interest in the creation and maintenance of an alliance or mutually beneficial relationship with the United States likely
motivated many nations to acquiesce to or placate US interests in fixing
boundaries. Kinship practices would continue to allow the Anishinaabe
to operate across these national lines as it had before.
Much like the Treaty of Prairie du Chien, US treaty commissioners
Lewis Cass and Thomas L. McKenney urged the establishment of permanent boundaries between the Anishinaabe and Menominee in the
treaty of August 11, 1827—not surprisingly, since Cass had negotiated the
Treaty of Prairie du Chien with Gen. William Clark. They stated: “We
want to do this, that they may know their own country & that there may
be no dispute between them nor between their children, nor between
their children’s children.” They went on to declare: “We wish therefore
that a few of the old Chiefs of each nation would meet each other & talk
the matter over & settle where the line shall be. The same great Spirit
made you all & put you on the same island together & you ought to
be able to agree about the division.”52 A Ho-Chunk chief responded to
this request by laying out his conception of creation and its relationship
to nationhood and kinship. He argued that “since the Great Spirit first
placed us upon this earth, the Menomonies our brothers, the Chippeways & ourselves have always hunted together peaceably. We hope still
to do so.”53 Kinship primarily determined access to resources, shaping
Anishinaabe land tenure. The ability of kin obligations to transcend national lines enabled and at times necessitated allied nations to confederate. As kinship obligations transcended national lines, Anishinaabe nations had to consider how these preexisting kin obligations would be
impacted by any new treaty partnerships. While recognizing the indi134

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

vidual autonomy of each nation, these allied polities were also cognizant of their responsibilities to one another as unified peoples. The HoChunk chief elaborated on how kinship had enabled these autonomous
nations to operate as one:
The Father of Life made the Earth for the Indian to roam upon—
that the Chippeways & Menomonies & Winibagoes might wander
wherever they pleased. Since the time that we can first remember
the fires of the Chippeways & Menomonies & Winibagoes have
been one fire—We have always held each other by the hand. We
appeal to the ancient traders to say whether they have not at all
times hunted upon our land, whether they have not found us
hunting together as brothers. And we hope that we, the Menomonies, Chippeways, & Winebagos will continue to live together like
three brothers as we have hither to lived. We do not need any line.54
“ we are all of one mind ” : negotiating single
treaties with multiple nations
Anishinaabe conceptions of nationhood in many ways differed from
those of the United States and Canada. As a result of these different conceptions of nationhood, treaty commissioners neglected to understand
how sociopolitical relationships shaped Anishinaabe nationhood. Instead, they sometimes conflated distinct groups as one polity when they
were gathered to enter into a single treaty. Nonetheless, these various
groups, though recognizing a collective identity, saw themselves as distinct, separate nations. Robert Surtees, in his treaty research report for
the 1850 Robinson Treaties between Anishinaabe bands and Canada, recognized this important point. He argued that “the Indians were not unified, however. Certainly there were some relations among those who occupied the long shoreline of the two upper Lakes, but the population of
some 3,000 persons was nonetheless divided into about two dozen fairly
distinct bands. Each had its own band organization with its own chief;
and each group restricted its operations to a clearly defined area.”55
Nonetheless, Canada and the United States alike preferred to negotiate for tracts of land that often fell under the jurisdiction of numerous
Native nations. The treaty record is replete with examples of these two
states’ dealings for land in the later treaty periods. While initial treaty
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

135

making revolved around the nations brought to the table, with the primary desire to establish “peace and friendship,” as US and Canadian interests turned toward land acquisition in the nineteenth century, they
often pursued treaties as a means to extinguish Indian title and sought
to bring the Native nations that had an interest in the desired land into
the treaty. Alexander Morris, in his report surrounding Treaty One and
Two, stated that Canadian treaty commissioner Wemyss M. Simpson
“then sent messengers at once to all the Indians within certain bounds,
asking to meet him here on the 25th day of July.”56 This fact has led some
scholars to conflate Anishinaabe conceptions of nationhood with US
and Canadian motivations, assuming that these various bands held the
land “in common.”
Indeed, at times, various Native nations did assert overlapping interests in territories where either mutual or disputed rights were in operation. But just as often, First Nations gathered to negotiate because
their mutual interests in the tract of land under question were not held
in common but instead constituted separate portions of land that fell
within the boundaries of land desired by the United States or Canada.
Thus, when various nations were brought together, they were often
careful to respect the autonomy and interests of one another.
Anishinaabe interests in recognizing the individual rights of each
band could delay treaty making, as Native nations refused to enter into
negotiations until all parties were present. Simpson encountered this in
1871 when he sought to negotiate agreements that have become known
as Treaty One and Two with the Plains Cree and Anishinaabe.57 Treaty
commissioners sometimes perceived Anishinaabe refusal to negotiate as
the result of internal tensions between Anishinaabe nations. In his letter
regarding Treaty One and Two, Simpson expressed his belief that internal jealousy delayed the negotiations:
Amongst these, as amongst other Indians with whom I have come
in contact, there exists great jealousy of one another, in all matters
relating to their communications with the officials of Her Majesty;
and in order to facilitate the object in view, it was most desirable
that suspicion and jealousy of all kinds should be allayed.58
Suspicion and jealousy also contributed to the reported delays that faced
Treaty Three, or so Crown negotiators assumed.
According to a report penned by Alexander Morris, “the princi136

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

pal cause of the delay was divisions and jealousies among themselves.”
However, even he recognized there was more to the delay than jealousy,
noting that “the nation had not met for many years, and some of them
had never before been assembled together.” He wrote: “They were very
jealous of each other, and dreaded any of the Chiefs having individual
communications with me, to prevent which they had guards on the approaches to my house and Mr. Dawson’s tent.”59 While Morris read or at
least reported these actions as evidence of jealousy, it is clear in the communications throughout the treaty negotiations that the various nations
delayed negotiations and set up guards as a means to remain unified
and act with “one mind.”
The Anishinaabe’s unified front made it more difficult for Canadian
treaty commissions to utilize the various bands’ separate interests to divide them and weaken their bargaining power. Even Morris realized that
the bands’ inability to select a higher chief to succeed the many principal chiefs who had passed away threatened negotiations. But what Morris interpreted as a mere matter of jealousy actually reflected the complexity of Anishinaabe nationhood. He saw or at least sought to deal
with them as a single polity and not as numerous distinct nations allied
with one another and sharing a collective identity as Anishinaabe people while still retaining distinct, separate rights as individual nations.
Treaty records demonstrate that the delay in negotiations resulted
primarily from Anishinaabe chiefs meeting in council with one another
to agree on the terms and conditions in which they were willing to negotiate the treaty. The Anishinaabe bands asserted their demands, which
had been agreed upon in council. Chief Ma-we-do-pe-nais stated: “In
regard to the money that you have promised us yesterday to each individual. I want to talk about the rules that we laid down before. It is
four years back since we have made these rules. The rules laid down are
the rules that they wish to follow—a council that has been agreed upon
by all the Indians.” Chief Ma-we-do-pe-nais then made known the demands of the council and assured the commissioners that all the nations
were in agreement. Another chief furnished the negotiators with a written copy and reminded them: “We have now laid down the conclusion
of our councils by our decisions. We tell you our wishes are not divided.
We are all of one mind.”60
Presenting a unified front was one of many strategies employed by
Anishinaabe leaders to maintain their power in the negotiation process.
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

137

Morris, aware of the control this provided the Anishinaabe, sought to
break down this united front. Morris stated that he would have to report that the Anishinaabe refused to make a treaty, evidenced by what
he claimed to be exorbitant demands. However, the Anishinaabe relied
on their alliances and refused to be intimidated, with one chief replying, “You see all our chiefs before you here as one mind. We have one
mind and one mouth. It is the decision of all of us; if you grant us our
demands you will not go back sorrowful; we would not refuse to make
a treaty if you would grant us our demands.” Morris, attempting to disrupt this unity, stated:
I have learned that you are not all of one mind. I know that some of
your interests are not the same—that some of you live in the north
far away from the river; and some live on the river, and that you have
got large sums of money for wood that you have cut and sold to the
steamboats; but the men in the north have not this advantage.61
Morris reported that the council broke up, and he doubted whether an
agreement could be made: “The Rainy River Indians were careless about
the treaty, because they could get plenty of money for cutting wood for
the boats, but the northern and eastern bands were anxious for one.” He
concluded that he would only treat with the interested parties willing
to accept his terms, “leaving out the few disaffected ones.”62 Morris was,
in fact, willing to alter his conception of Anishinaabe nationhood if it
better served his interests. He recognized that the Anishinaabe, though
having a collective identity based on shared language, stories, practices,
and kin, also were a people whose individual nations had distinct interests based on their geographical location, history, group desires, and
more. Anishinaabe nations chose the most advantageous political path.
Alliances across Anishinaabe nations often allowed the Anishinaabe to
present a unified front against the massive forces of the United States
and Canada, but when these alliances countered Anishinaabe desires,
they would also seek separate treaties.
“ we are buying it as a whole ” : us and canadian
interest in reconfiguring anishinaabe nationhood
It may seem paradoxical that Anishinaabe desires for separate treaties
often were motivated by the same desires that drove Anishinaabe na138

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

tions to assert “one mind.” The cause was often the same: Anishinaabe
leaders, wrestling with the changing meanings attached to the language
of treaties, asserted their own conceptions of nationhood, which were
fluid and flexible. Anishinaabe leaders wanted to preserve the political
autonomy of each nation, maintaining a policy of noninterference. Yet
they also sought to resist the politically narrow and territorially restrictive notions of nationhood employed by the United States and Canada.
Anishinaabe leaders made use of their alliances and sociopolitical relationships when it was advantageous in treaty making. Yet when this
strategy no longer served to meet their aim, the Anishinaabe altered
their approach, transforming and adapting to the ever-changing political landscape. This can be seen in the negotiations surrounding the
October 2, 1863, “Old Crossing” treaty with the Pembina and Red Lake
bands of Anishinaabe.
Much like the numbered treaties in Canada, treaty negotiations with
US treaty commissioner Alexander Ramsey concerning the Red River
Valley were stalled, as the Pembina band had not yet arrived. Unlike Alexander Morris, Ramsey refrained from attributing this delay to jealousy between the bands. Instead, he reported that “it was determined
to postpone the opening of negotiations till they came in, as I deemed
it important, for obvious reasons of policy and convenience, to unite
both communities in one treaty, and avoid, if possible, the separate negotiations to which it was found they were inclined.”63 Yet while Ramsey
repeatedly pushed for a single treaty, Red Lake and Pembina bands refused to interfere in one another’s business, recognizing each other’s political autonomy.
Pembina chief Red Bear tactically asserted a policy of noninterference, stating, “I want to wait until the Red Lakers get through.” Ramsey
responded by encouraging a single treaty under any means: “This is the
first time he has said to me he wished to do business separate from the
Red Lakers. I should prefer that they would work jointly with the Red
Lakers; but I don’t care how they go at it, so they do something, and do it
at once.” As Pembina chief Little Chief asserted that they would not take
up business until the Red Lake band had concluded, Ramsey responded
by expressing that the United States was interested in buying a piece of
land and wanted to know the costs for the whole: “We do not recognize
any order of precedence in this thing. We are buying it as a whole, and
want to know what they offer in order to know what to do about it.”64
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

139

US determination to negotiate collective agreements with the separate nations over specific tracts of land countered Anishinaabe interest
in noninterference with related and allied nations and these nations’ autonomy over their own lands. Little Chief expressed as much to Ramsey:
“The reason that I have not spoken heretofore is that I thought I would
be in the way of the Red Lakers.”65 He assured Ramsey that his nation
would also engage in negotiations once the Red Lake nation had finished. Governor Ramsey acceded to their desires for separate treaties
and met with the Red Lake and Pembina nations individually.
Interestingly, in negotiations with the Pembina band, Ramsey also
learned that until recently the Pembina had “held the country in common with the Red Lake Indians; but when they assembled at the Grand
Forks last year to make a treaty, they had agreed upon a dividing line.”66
While these negotiations did not discuss the relationship that facilitated
this shared territory, kinship likely encouraged collective access to the
area.67 Anishinaabe leaders recognized that utilizing their shared relationships to negotiate a mutual treaty would not be advantageous for
these nations. Instead, their attention to the recent divisions among
the two nations likely proved beneficial for each. Ramsey accused the
Pembina of committing depredations on whites, and this new approach
allowed the Red Lake band to disconnect themselves from these allegations. Furthermore, the Red Lake band had problems of its own, as
division arose between Chief Moose Dung and May-dwa-gun-on-ind
regarding whether to enter into a treaty at all. While the Red Lake Anishinaabe shared a national identity, this by no means ensured that internal divisions would not arise in the treaty process. Rarely, if ever, was
full consensus attained on whether and how to proceed in a treaty with
the United States and Canada.
Anishinaabe negotiators responded in varied ways to US and Canadian efforts to conclude comprehensive treaties over discrete pieces of
land, as opposed to dealing with individual bands. Some bands used
this to their advantage, aligning their demands and presenting a unified front. Others sought separate treaties and refused to negotiate as
one body. In some cases, US and Canadian treaty officials encouraged
the bands to present a unified voice. For the July 29, 1837, treaty, Governor Dodge reported that “so many bands of their nation, & from such
remote parts of it, had never before, he believed met together, & that
he wished them now to advise with each other, and unite and act to140

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

gether, as one people.” Recognizing the separation of bands, he continued: “Altho’ they were of different bands, they belonged to the same
great nation, and their interests were in common.”68 Dodge conflated
the collective identity of Anishinaabe people with his preferred norm of
a single, unified nation. The Anishinaabe recognized their connections
as a people yet were strategic enough to also express their individual autonomy. The complex nexus of kinship relations allowed Anishinaabe
people to operate across national lines, but it often also motivated the
United States and Canada to attempt to consolidate Native peoples and
their political interests into a single polity when it served US and Canadian interests.
As parties to the Treaty of 1836 with the United States, the Ojibwe
and Odaawa nations nicely articulated the distinction between the collective rights dictated across kin relations and the political autonomy of
each nation in a letter to President Andrew Jackson. The United States
wanted to relocate the Anishinaabe to lands held by their extended kin,
the Chippewa west of Lake Superior. To this they responded:
The Chippewas of that remote northern quarter, are separate from
us, by an average distance of about [nine hundred miles], all of
which is [however] occupied by Chippewas. They hold separate
government over their respective villages, have separate interests,
and are excluded wholly from the benefits of the treaty, as they
[possessed] no part of the land sold it would be injustice to them,
to [unintelligible text] or [unintelligible text] that they should [resign] for our residence, a part of their large country, on the headwaters of the Mississippi without an adequate compensation for
it. Besides which, they are in an impoverished situation having
barely the means of procuring their subsistence by hunting from
year to year.69
The Ojibwe and Odaawa concluded their letter by encouraging the president to negotiate with the Anishinaabe west of Lake Superior to purchase land upon which they might relocate.70
conclusion: marking the nation
The Anishinaabe, like Nenabozho, were marked by their treaties with the
United States and Canada. Every nation is invariably marked by its reStark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

141

lationships with other nations. Nations are limited by their agreements
with other nations, which often entail various obligations. Much as the
United States’ and Canada’s nationhood entails their recognition of and
adherence to their treaties with other nations, including First Nations,
Anishinaabe nations were limited by their preexisting alliances with
Anishinaabe and other nations when they negotiated treaties with the
United States and Canada. These nations had been marked by their alliances to one another. Anishinaabe political identity, which shaped their
nationhood in the nineteenth century, was layered as their land tenure
systems were dictated by a nexus of relationships. Kin obligations at
times necessitated mutual access to shared territories, confounding US
and Canadian treaty commissioners who sought to fix Anishinaabe national borders. The Anishinaabe resisted the imposition of Western constructions of nationhood by invoking and utilizing their kin and other
sociopolitical alliances, which transcended national lines and would be
impacted by treaties with the United States and Canada.
Throughout their treaty negotiations, the Anishinaabe asserted their
own conceptions of nationhood, which respected the political autonomy of each nation while concurrently recognizing their obligations
and responsibilities to their allied nations. Anishinaabe leaders at times
entered into treaties together, utilizing their alliances to assert “one
mind” as a measure to increase their bargaining power and incorporate
the various autonomous nations that would be impacted by the treaty.
When a single treaty did not serve the autonomous needs of the allied
nations, they expressed their desires for separate treaties.
Anishinaabe treaties with the United States and Canada were part
of a watershed historical moment in treaty making, in which treaties
were transforming from diplomatic accords of peace and alliance that
sought to contain Native peoples within the boundaries of empire to
imperial tools for the creation and expansion of the nation-state, which
constructed Native peoples outside of these bounded spaces. The Anishinaabe negotiated these changes by trying to mitigate the impacts of
state models that constructed the nation along territorial lines just as
Nenabozho, in the form of a hare, sought to allay the impacts of his
theft of fire by trying to rub out the fire on his fur, but both were indelibly marked.
The United States and Canada have yet to fully recognize how they
were marked by their treaties with Native nations, failing to fulfill their
142

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

political commitments and responsibilities outlined in treaties. As Native nations today call upon the United States and Canada to adhere
to their treaties, which recognize the national character and sovereign rights of Native nations, perhaps the multitude and complexities
of Anishinaabe expressions of nationhood may shed light on how nations bound by their treaties can simultaneously respect the autonomy
of each nation while recognizing their mutual responsibilities to one
another.
notes
I am grateful to the blind reviewers—David Chang, Brian Hosmer, Larry
Nesper, David Wilkins, and Michael Witgen—for their generous and insightful
comments. Participants of the American Indian Studies Workshop at the University of Minnesota also provided thoughtful comments on early drafts.
1. Nenabozho, often referred to as Original Man, is the central character
(trickster) in many Anishinaabe aadizookaanan (stories or legends). He is also
referred to as Wenabozho. These spellings come from John Nichols and Earl
Nyholm, A Concise Dictionary of Minnesota Ojibwe (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1995), 118.
2. “Manitou” comes from the Ojibwe word manidoo, meaning “god, spirit,
manitou.” See Nichols and Nyholm, A Concise Dictionary, 77.
3. All the dialogue in this story is taken from Truman Michelson, ed., and
William Jones, comp., Ojibwa Texts, 2 vols., ed. Franz Boas, Publications of the
American Ethnological Society, vol. 7, pt. 1 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1917), 7, 9, 11, 15.
The remainder of the text is my retelling of the story.
4. There have been a number of names with varied spelling for the people who call themselves Anishinaabe and/or Ojibwe. However, as E. S. Rogers
notes, “although the Indian groups now referred to as Chippewa, Ojibwa, and
Saulteaux descend from closely related bands that were living in a fairly compact area in the mid-seventeenth century, at no time has there been a single
distinctive name for these groups alone” (“Southeastern Ojibwa,” in Northeast,
ed. Bruce G. Trigger, Handbook of North American Indians, vol. 15 [Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1996], 768). The historical record initially labeled
these people as Algonquin and Ottawa. Contemporary records primarily utilize
the modern local band names, which refer to specific communities and peoples and not the larger group of the Chippewa/Ojibwe, Mississauga, and Saulteaux. Chippewa is the English rendering of Ojibwe, and its usage is primarily
in the United States and southern Canada. US federal records and treaties label
these people Chippewa. Canadian sources primarily reference these people as
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

143

Ojibwe (also spelled Ojibwa and Ojibway). Many of the southeastern Ojibwe
are often referenced as the Mississauga. Saulteaux is primarily found in Canadian references on the Ojibwe that encompass many of the people who were
historically labeled as the Outchibous. I have chosen to use Anishinaabe, as it
is the name used by the people themselves and adheres to contemporary scholarly practice. In addition, Anishinaabe connotes a broader group than some of
these aforementioned terms are associated with. As I hope this article indicates,
Anishinaabe conceptions of nationhood are complex and multifarious and involved extensive relationships across nations. Thus, while my focus is primarily on those people who refer to themselves as Ojibwe, I use the more inclusive category of Anishinaabe to recognize the broader peoples discussed within
this study. For a list of the various spellings and meanings associated with the
Anishinaabe people, see Rogers, “Southeastern Ojibwa”; and Robert E. Ritzenthaler, “Southwestern Chippewa,” in Trigger, Northeast.
5. Nichols and Nyholm, A Concise Dictionary, 73.
6. See Frances Densmore and Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Chippewa Customs, reprint ed., Publications of the Minnesota Historical Society (Saint Paul: Minnesota Historical Society Press, 1979), 74. For information on the paths of souls, see Basil Johnston, Ojibway Heritage (Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press, 1976), 103–8.
7. While there is no etymological connection between ishkode and the morpheme ode’ within the linguistic method, folk etymologies (the stories told by
speakers based on perceived resemblances and connections) have made this
connection.
8. “Home” is used here to mean the land of the deceased.
9. For further discussion of the importance of tobacco and offerings, see A.
Irving Hallowell, Culture and Experience (New York: Schocken Books, 1967);
Densmore and Smithsonian Institution, Chippewa Customs; Anton Treuer, Living Our Language: Ojibwe Tales & Oral Histories, Native Voices series (Saint
Paul: Minnesota Historical Society Press, 2001).
10. Fire has been employed in Anishinaabe political discourse to represent
both the nation itself as well as the act of entering into a treaty. The rhetorical
symbol of fire has been used to reference the treaty council, while fire has also
been utilized in its physical form during the treaty council. See Documents Relating to the Negotiation of Ratified and Unratified Treaties with Various Tribes of
Indians, 1801–69, National Archives Microfilm Publications, Record Group 75,
microcopy no. T-494 (hereafter cited as NAMP), rolls 1–10; Alexander Morris,
The Treaties of Canada with the Indians of Manitoba and the North-West Territories: Including the Negotiations on Which They Were Based, and Other Information Relating Thereto (Toronto: Prospero Books, 2000).
11. For more information on the Three Fires Confederacy, see James A. Clif-

144

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ton, George Leslie Cornell, and James M. McClurken, People of the Three Fires:
The Ottawa, Potawatomi and Ojibway of Michigan (Grand Rapids, MI: Grand
Rapids Inter-Tribal Council, 1986); Patty Loew, Indian Nations of Wisconsin:
Histories of Endurance and Renewal (Madison: Wisconsin Historical Society
Press, 2001); R. David Edmunds, The Potawatomis, Keepers of the Fire, 1st ed.
(Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1978); Donald L. Fixico, “The Alliance
of the Three Fires in Trade and War, 1630–1812,” Michigan Historical Review 20,
no. 2 (1994).
12. Ratified Treaty No. 247 Documents Relating to the Negotiation of the Treaty
of June 5 and 17, 1846, with the Chippewa, Ottawa, and Potawatomi Indians,
NAMP, roll 4:F310–11.
13. Ratified Treaty No. 247 Documents.
14. Nichols and Nyholm, A Concise Dictionary, 38 (Nichols and Nyholm
translate this word simply to mean “Potawatomi”); William W. Warren, History of the Ojibway People, reprint ed. (Saint Paul: Minnesota Historical Society
Press, 1984), 32.
15. I utilize David Wilkins’s definition of a treaty: “A formal agreement, compact, or contract between two or more sovereign nations that creates legal rights
and duties for the contracting parties. A treaty is not only a law but also a contract between two or more nations and must, if possible, be so construed as to
give full force and effect to all its parts” (American Indian Politics and the American Political System [Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002], 339). Treaty
making is a long-standing practice among the Anishinaabe, its origins preceding contact with European nations. Anishinaabe nations entered into numerous treaties with other tribal nations, often formalized through the exchange of
wampum, pipes, drums, and other ceremonial items. For additional information, see Leanne Simpson, “Looking after Gdoo-naaganinaa: Precolonial Nishnaabeg Diplomatic and Treaty Relationships,” Wicazo Sa Review 23, no. 2 (2008).
16. Thank you to Dr. Jill Doerfler for bringing this point to my attention.
17. Thomas King, The Truth about Stories: A Native Narrative (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2005), 2.
18. Julia Cruikshank, “Discovery of Gold on the Klondike: Perspectives from
Oral Tradition,” in Reading beyond Words: Contexts for Native History, ed. Jennifer S. H. Brown and Elizabeth Vibert (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1996), 435.
19. Michael J. Witgen, “An Infinity of Nations: How Indians, Empires, and
Western Migration Shaped National Identity in North America,” PhD diss.,
University of Washington, 2004. See Witgen’s discussion on the power of naming and mapping (334).
20. For example, see Jace Weaver, Craig S. Womack, and Robert Allen Warrior, American Indian Literary Nationalism (Albuquerque: University of New
Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

145

Mexico Press, 2006); Taiaiake Alfred, Heeding the Voices of Our Ancestors: Kahnawake Mohawk Politics and the Rise of Native Nationalism (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995); Jeff J. Corntassel, “Who Is Indigenous? ‘Peoplehood’ and
Ethnonationalist Approaches to Rearticulating Indigenous Identity,” Nationalism and Ethnic Politics 9, no. 1 (2003); Tom Holm, J. Diane Pearson, and Ben
Chavis, “Peoplehood: A Model for the Extension of Sovereignty in American
Indian Studies,” Wicazo Sa Review 18, no. 1 (2003).
21. Taiaiake Alfred, Peace, Power, Righteousness: An Indigenous Manifesto
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 47, 56.
22. Walker Connor, Ethnonationalism: The Quest for Understanding (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994). See chapter 4, “Terminological Chaos
(‘A Nation Is a Nation, Is a State, Is an Ethnic Group, Is a . . .’),” 89–117.
23. Wilkins, American Indian Politics, 338.
24. Alfred, Peace, Power, Righteousness, 65, emphasis in original.
25. Craig S. Womack, Red on Red: Native American Literary Separatism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999), 14.
26. I utilize the term band to refer to the divisions between the Anishinaabe
collective. Bands were originally constituted by a number of families that lived
together and often became known by their locations, their villages. Today, the
Anishinaabe continue to divide along band lines yet maintain a shared identity through common ancestry as Anishinaabe people. These separate bands
are primarily recognized as separate nations that maintain their own governments and laws. For example, many Anishinaabe nations were recognized by
their band names in their treaties and continue to employ these names today
(e.g., Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians and Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians). Some bands were brought together in treaty making and/or visà-vis a variety of policies and statutes and are dealt with by the United States
as a single nation (e.g., White Earth Nation). In Canada many Anishinaabe nations maintain names that pertain to their locations. In addition, “First Nation”
is common usage in Canada to refer to Native nations, and many Anishinaabe
First Nations do not use “band” as part of their official national name. I primarily utilize the term “nation” in place of band to reference individual bands, as
it more accurately recognizes the political autonomy and sovereignty of each
band in relation to the Anishinaabe collective.
27. Joanne Barker, “For Whom Sovereignty Matters,” in Sovereignty Matters:
Locations of Contestation and Possibility in Indigenous Struggles for Self-Determination, ed. Joanne Barker, Contemporary Indigenous Issues series (Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press, 2005), 4.
28. Felix S. Cohen, “The Spanish Origin of Indian Rights in the United
States,” Georgetown Law Journal 31, no. 1 (1942); Robert A. Williams Jr., The
American Indian in Western Legal Thought: The Discourses of Conquest (New

146

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

York: Oxford University Press, 1990); David E. Wilkins, “A Constitutional Conundrum: The Resilience of Tribal Sovereignty during American Nationalism
and Expansion: 1810–1871,” Oklahoma City University Law Review 25, nos. 1 and
2 (2000).
29. Barker, “For Whom Sovereignty Matters,” 4.
30. For further discussion, see Helen Hornbeck Tanner, “Ojibwa,” in Encyclopedia of North American Indians: Native American History, Culture, and Life
from Paleo-Indians to the Present, ed. Frederick E. Hoxie (New York: Houghton
Mifflin Company, 1996).
31. Ratified Treaty No. 223 Documents Relating to the Negotiations of the Treaty
of July 29, 1837, with the Chippewa Indians, NAMP, roll 3:F550.
32. Heidi Bohaker, “Nindoodemag: The Significance of Algonquian Kinship
Networks in the Eastern Great Lakes Region, 1600–1701,” William and Mary
Quarterly 63, no. 1 (2006): 26.
33. Bohaker, “Nindoodemag,” 36. For a discussion of Sault Sainte Marie as
one such gathering site that tied various groups to one another, also see Harold Hickerson, The Chippewa and Their Neighbors: A Study in Ethnohistory, ed.
George and Louise Spindler, Studies in Anthropological Method series (New
York: Holt, 1970), 39–41.
34. For additional information regarding how these relationships were facilitated, with particular attention to the practice of the Feast of the Dead, which
tied various groups to one another, see Harold Hickerson, The Chippewa and
Their Neighbors: A Study in Ethnohistory (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970).
35. Bohaker, “Nindoodemag,” 42.
36. Michael Witgen, “The Rituals of Possession: Native Identity and the Invention of Empire in Seventeenth-Century Western North America,” Ethnohistory 54, no. 4 (2007): 641, 646–47.
37. For a discussion on Indigenous individual autonomy and the responsibilities of an individual to the collective, see Russell Barsh, “The Nature and
Spirit of North American Political Systems,” American Indian Quarterly 10, no.
3 (1986).
38. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents Relating to the Negotiation of the Treaty
of August 19, 1825, with the Sioux, Chippewa, Sauk and Fox, Menominee, Iowa,
and Winnebago Indians and part of the Ottawa, Chippewa, and Potawatomi of
the Illinois Indians, NAMP, roll 1:F712, F724.
39. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F726.
40. Patricia Albers and Jeanne Kay, “Sharing the Land: A Study in American
Indian Territoriality,” in A Cultural Geography of North American Indians, ed.
Thomas Ross and Tyrel G. Moore (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1987).
41. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F726, F727, F728–29. ShimStark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

147

gaubaw’Assin stated: “My Fathers have taken a great deal of trouble to collect
their Red children together and to keep them in peace. But I am afraid it will
not be good. The Young men are bad & hard to govern tho there are some respectable chiefs among them.”
42. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F731, F723.
43. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F735.
44. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F735–36. Co-ra-mo-nse states:
“I have a small section of country of which I wish to tell you. It is where I was
born & now live. It commences at our valley on Lake Winnebago. The lands I
claim are mine & the nations here know it is not only claimed by us but by our
Brothers the Socs & Foxes Menomines Iowas Illinois & Sioux they have owned
it in common—it would be difficult to divide it—it belongs as much to one as
the other” (F737). “My Fathers I did not know that any of my relations had any
particular Lands—it is true everyone owns his own lodge & the grounds he may
cultivate—I had thought the Rivers were the common property of all Red Skins
& not used exclusively by any particular nation” (underlined sections were difficult to read; thus this transcription may be in error).
45. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F736.
46. Albers and Kay, “Sharing the Land.”
47. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F737.
48. Albers and Kay, “Sharing the Land.”
49. Ratified Treaty No. 139 Documents, roll 1:F739.
50. Unnamed chief, Ratified Treaty No. 145 Documents Relating to the Negotiation of the Treaty of August 5, 1826, with the Chippewa, NAMP, roll 1:F861.
51. Unnamed chief, Ratified Treaty No. 145 Documents, roll 1:F862.
52. Ratified Treaty No. 148 Documents Relating to the Negotiation of the Treaty
of August 11, 1827, with the Chippewa, Menominee, and Winnebago Indians,
NAMP, roll 2:F5.
53. Ratified Treaty No. 148 Documents, roll 2:F17.
54. Ratified Treaty No. 148 Documents, roll 2:F17, emphasis added.
55. Robert J. Surtees, “Treaty Research Report: The Robinson Treaties,” Treaties and Historical Research Centre, Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. Originally published in Ottawa by Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, 1986. http://
www.ainc-inac.gc.ca/pr/trts/hti/Trob/index_e.html, 3–4.
56. Morris, The Treaties of Canada, 27.
57. In a letter from Wemyss M. Simpson regarding Treaty One and Two to the
secretary of state in November 1871, Simpson stated: “At this preliminary conference Henry Prince [chief of the Swampies and Chippewa] said that he could not
enter upon any negotiations, as he was not empowered to speak or act for those
bands of Indians not then present” (Morris, The Treaties of Canada, 35).
58. Morris, The Treaties of Canada, 38.

148

american indian quarterly/spring 2012/vol. 36, no. 2

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

59. Morris, The Treaties of Canada, 47–48, 54.
60. Morris, The Treaties of Canada, 58, 60, emphasis added.
61. Morris, The Treaties of Canada, 62–63.
62. Morris, The Treaties of Canada, 65.
63. President’s message, January 7 and 8, 1864, “Treaty of October 2, 1863 with
the Red Lake & Pembina bands of Chippewas,” Indian Treaty Files (S.R. 38B–
C9), 7, RG 46, National Archives.
64. Treaty of October 2, 1863, 32.
65. Treaty of October 2, 1863, 33.
66. Treaty of October 2, 1863, 36.
67. Albers and Kay, “Sharing the Land.”
68. Ratified Treaty No. 223, roll 3:F557.
69. Ratified Treaty No. 201 Documents Relating to the Negotiation of the Treaty
of March 28, 1836, with the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, NAMP, roll 3:F371.
Also see president’s message, April 1, 1836, “Treaty of March 28, 1836 with the Ottawas and Chippewas,” Indian Treaty Files (S.R. 24B–C6), RG 46, National Archives. All words placed in brackets indicate that the transcription is uncertain.
70. Ratified Treaty No. 201 Documents, roll 3:F372.

Stark: Anishinaabe Articulations of Nationhood

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 01:57:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

149


