---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Institute of Urban Studies, University of Winnipeg
Beyond Food Security: Understanding Access to Cultural Food for Urban Indigenous People
in Winnipeg as Indigenous Food Sovereignty
Author(s): Jaime Cidro, Bamidele Adekunle, Evelyn Peters and Tabitha Martens
Source: Canadian Journal of Urban Research , Vol. 24, No. 1, Food and the City: Special
Issue (SUMMER 2015), pp. 24-43
Published by: Institute of Urban Studies, University of Winnipeg
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26195276

Beyond Food Security: Understanding Access to Cultural Food for Urban
Indigenous People in Winnipeg as Indigenous Food Sovereignty

Jaime Cidro
Department of Anthropology
University of Winnipeg
Bamidele Adekunle
Urban and Inner City Studies
University of Winnipeg
Evelyn Peters
Canada Research Chair in Inner-City Issues, Community Learning, and Engagement
University of Winnipeg
Tabitha Martens
Environment and Geography
University of Manitoba
Abstract
Access to safe, affordable and nutritious food is an obstacle facing many Indigenous
people in the inner city of Winnipeg, which is known for having vast food deserts.
While food security is an urgent social, economic, cultural and health issue for
Indigenous people in urban areas, and particularly those living in inner city areas,
there are some unique elements of food security related to cultural values. Access to
cultural food in urban communities is a challenge for Indigenous people. This paper
discusses the results of some preliminary research conducted which explored the
experiences and meanings associated with Indigenous cultural food for Indigenous
people living in urban communities and the larger goals of what is being called
“Indigenous Food Sovereignty” (IFS) with regards to cultural food specifically. When
Indigenous people have the skills to practice IFS, a whole range of positive benefits
to their social and economic well-being can unfold. Three themes which emerged
from this research include (1) growing, harvesting, preparing and eating cultural food
as ceremony, (2) cultural food as a part of connection to land through reciprocity and
(3) re-learning IFS to address food insecurity in the city.
Keywords: sovereignty, Indigenous, cultural food, inner-city

Canadian Journal of Urban Research, Volume 24, Issue 1, pages 24-43.
Copyright © 2015 by the Institute of Urban Studies.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
ISSN: 1188-3774

24

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

Résumé
L’accès aux aliments nutritifs, sains et abordables est un obstacle auquel sont confrontés
de nombreux autochtones dans le centre-ville de Winnipeg, qui est connu comme un
des plus grands déserts alimentaire. Alors que la sécurité alimentaire est une urgence
sociale, économique, culturelle et sanitaire pour les populations autochtones dans les
zones urbaines, et plus particulièrement pour ceux vivant dans les quartiers défavorisés,
il existe des éléments uniques de sécurité alimentaire liés aux valeurs culturelles.
L’accès à la nourriture culturelle des communautés urbaines est un défi pour les
populations autochtones. Ce document décrit les résultats de recherches préliminaires
menées explorant les experiences et les valeurs associées aux aliments culturels pour
les communautés autochtones vivant dans des collectivités urbaines et les grands
objectifs de ce qu’on appelle Souveraineté alimentaire Autochtone (IFS). Lorsque
les communautés autochtones acquièrent les compétences de pratiquer l’IFS, toute
une gamme de bénéfices à leur bien-être économique et social en découle. Les trois
thèmes qui ont émergé de cette recherche incluent (1) la culture, récolte, préparation
et consommation de la nourriture culturelle en tant que cérémonie, (2) la nourriture
culturelle comme liaison à la terre par la réciprocité et (3) le ré-apprentissage IFS afin
d’informer sur l’insécurité alimentaire dans la ville.
Mots clés: souveraineté, autochtones, nourriture culturelle, le centre-ville
1. Introduction
Canada as a whole has achieved economic advancements, and many experience a high
standard of living with little first-hand experiences associated with physical hunger.
However this perception is very narrow and fails to address the essence of food security
for diverse and marginalized populations. The economic advancement of Canada
notwithstanding, food insecurity, which includes accessibility, availability and utilization
of culturally adequate and acceptable foods, has been recorded and is a major concern
especially among the economically vulnerable groups (McIntyre et al. 2000, Che and
Chen 2001). Access to safe, affordable and nutritious food is an obstacle facing many
urban Indigenous people1, particularly in the inner city of Winnipeg, which is known
for the vast food deserts. In recent years, Winnipeg’s inner city, including the north
end and downtown area has experienced the shutdown of the majority of the discount
grocery stores, leaving people with few choices to access affordable and nutritious food.
A feasibility study conducted in 2013 revealed that closure of grocery stores coincides
with other development debates around the downtown area’s potential for growth
and momentum, suggesting that the limited supply of downtown grocery options is
a potential barrier to future downtown growth—particularly residential development
(Kaufman, 2013, p. 3). While food security is an urgent social, economic, cultural and
health issue for Indigenous people in urban areas, and particularly those living in inner
city areas, there are some unique elements of food security related to cultural values.
In an Indigenous context, food security is mostly discussed for remote, rural
communities. However, food insecurity also exists in urban centres for Indigenous
communities. The Environics Institute found that 44% of Indigenous people in

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

25

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

Winnipeg felt that it was important that future generations know about traditions
pertaining to food (Environics Institute 2011). Food security, as defined by the Food
and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations “exists when all people, at all
times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food
that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life”
(FAO 2010, 8). The four pillars of food security—access, availability, utilization, and
stability of supply take on unique characteristics in an Indigenous (Power 2008) and
urban (Mundel and Chapman 2010) context.
This paper discusses the results of preliminary research conducted which
explored the experiences and meanings associated with Indigenous cultural food for
Indigenous people living in urban communities. The research found that Indigenous
people in the city experienced food insecurity, but also were working towards larger
goals of what is being called “Indigenous Food Sovereignty” (IFS) with regards to
cultural food specifically. Research was conducted in partnership with the Indian
and Metis Friendship Centre of Winnipeg to explore food security from an urban
Indigenous perspective with a particular focus on maintaining culturally valued food
in the inner city.
The ways in which IFS is operationalized within an urban context requires further
understanding. Relatedly, when Indigenous people have the skills to practice IFS, then
a whole range of positive benefits to their social and economic well-being will unfold.
Three themes which emerged from this research include: (1) growing, harvesting,
preparing and eating cultural food as ceremony, (2) cultural food as a part of connection
to land through reciprocity and (3) re-learning IFS to address food insecurity in the
city. These three themes will be explored in more detail.
2. Background
Indigenous people and food are often explored within a deficit based construct, and
most often in a traditional environment or rural and/or remote community. Food
security has also been explored in the literature with a focus on urban Indigenous
people, but less so with a focus on cultural foods (Zurba et al. 2012; Willows et. al.
2011; Baskin et. al. 2009). The topic of food security for urban Indigenous people
requires an examination into several important theoretical areas including culture and
food consumption, food security, food deserts and inner city food access, Indigenous
food sovereignty, Winnipeg’s Indigenous population and food, cultural food and
health and urban Indigenous people and culture.
2.1 Culture and Food Consumption
The relationship between culture and food consumption is not well understood in
academic literature besides a small number of research projects (Adekunle et al. 2010,
2011, 2012; Abdel-Ghany and Sharpe 1997, Wang and Lo 2007). Some literature has
emerged in recent years attempting to examine the complex relationships between
ethnicity2, consumption and acculturation in Canada (Abdel-Ghany and Sharpe 1997,
Adekunle, et al. 2010).

26

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

Food consumption plays a central role as a cultural foundation for Indigenous
people. Yukon First Nations people interviewed about their consumption of traditional
food indicated that eating cultural food supported basic cultural values including
keeping people “in tune” with nature, facilitating sharing, was a way for adults to display
responsibility for their children and to practice spirituality (Receveur et al. 1998, 118).
Wilson (2003, 88) noted that there was a strong link between food and medicine
for Anishinabek people in Ontario. She indicated that: “certain plants, berries, and
animals…are not only consumed for nutritional reasons but can also be used in the
production of medicines.” Lambden et al’s (2007) study of Yukon First Nations, Dene/
Metis and Inuit women found that they considered traditional foods to be culturally
beneficial. In Toronto, work by Baskin et al. (2009) describes young Aboriginal
women’s lack of access to traditional foods as being problematic because they “tied
their Aboriginal cultures to such foods and wanted to be able to pass this knowledge
on to their children” (8). To date, though, there has been almost no substantial body
of work on urban Indigenous people’s preferences and attitudes toward cultural foods
especially in an urban context.
2.2 Food Security and Indigenous People
The experience of food insecurity exists on a spectrum which ranges from “food
anxiety to qualitative compromises in food selection and consumption, to quantitative
compromises in intake, to the physical sensation of hunger” (McIntyre and Rondeau
2009, 188). Canada has expressed its commitment to the achievement of food security
for all Canadians, with a particular recognition of Indigenous people through the
International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention 169 (1989). This convention
recognizes that food insecurity amongst Indigenous people can be addressed through
ensuring access to both traditional and market food. However, there has been a
politicization of food security among this group. The focus has been primarily on rural,
remote and reserve communities, not urban Indigenous populations (Cuthand 2012).
According to Willows et al., (2011) 33% of Indigenous households are food
insecure compared to 9% of the non-Indigenous households. This has led to a rapid
change in eating patterns, reduced food intake and increased anxiety over food among
many Aboriginal families. Furthermore, the findings of Oliver De Schutter, United
Nations Special rapporteur of his 2012 visit of the poor inner-city neighbourhoods
and remote Indigenous communities in Manitoba and Alberta showed that 2.5
million Canadians were food insecure and that many lived in desperate conditions
(Cuthand 2012), while Mercille (2012) reported more prevailing food insecurity
among the geographically isolated Indigenous communities. Food insecurity among
the Indigenous population is an urgent issue because of the resultant high rates of
health and diet related complications.
Food insecurity is prevalent among many urban Indigenous populations in
Canada, however little information is available in this area. In an urban context, food
insecurity information on Indigenous people has depended on small samples obtained
from food bank users (Tambay and Catlin 1995). As Power (2008) has observed, this
information has failed to address the diversity of the urban Indigenous people in terms
of location, age and gender.
CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

27

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

Many Indigenous people experience food insecurity, specifically as it relates to
compromises in types of food as the foods they would normally consume are inaccessible
due to availability or price (Sinclaire 1997). The financial burden of providing for
family requires many Indigenous people in the city to reduce their food budgets. The
result can be a decline in food with high nutrient content. In their study based on the
1990/99 Canadian National Population Health Survey data, Che and Chen (2001, 18)
found that the prevalence of food insecurity was high among Indigenous people living
off reserves with more than one-quarter (27%) reporting at least some food insecurity,
and 24% experiencing a compromised diet. Indigenous people were about one and a
half times as likely to live in a food insecure household than non-Indigenous people.
Food insecurity is inextricably linked to poverty and related issues such as lack of
affordable housing. Baskin et al. (2009) describes the connection between poverty and
food insecurity in Winnipeg:
There are over 3,000 families currently on the waiting list for rent-gearedto-income accommodations, with many of the homes not large enough
for families with multiple children. This lack of affordable housing could
mean that many Aboriginal lone parents are spending the majority of
their income on housing which causes financial shortages that result in
food insecurity. (Baskin et al. 2009, 2)
Power (2008) however, has argued that cultural food security is an additional
level of food security and suggests that additional research is required to understand
Indigenous perspectives on food security. She suggests, for example, that “in terms of
access, food security may be affected by access to traditional/country food, as well as
access to market food” (96). National food guides are often based on Western ideas
of categories of food and do not reflect Indigenous realities. The Canada Food Guide
was revised in 2007 to include versions specific to First Nations, Inuit and Metis
populations, with translated copies available in Anishnawbe, Plains Cree, Woods Cree,
English and Inuktitut (Health Canada 2007). Willows (2005) identified a knowledge
gap concerning Indigenous beliefs about food.
2.3 Food Deserts and Inner City Access
Researchers have found that inner cities or areas with low-income populations often
have less access to supermarkets (Cummins and Macintyre 2005). This means that
residents are more dependent on smaller food and convenience stores which are
more expensive and less likely to offer a range of healthy foods (Donkin et al. 2000).
Accessibility to food retailers that provide healthy foods at low prices affects the
dietary choices that individuals make (Wrigley et al. 2003). While there has been
relatively little research on supermarket accessibility in Canadian cities, two recent
studies suggest that high need and inner city neighbourhoods often have less access
to supermarkets (Peters and McCreary 2008, Smoyer-Tomic et al. 2006). It may be
that the lack of access to supermarkets also means that there is less access to culturally

28

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

important foods. It is important to note that in Winnipeg Neechi Foods and Neechi
Commons, an inner city Aboriginal cooperative enterprise, provides access to many of
these foods, for example fish, bison, blueberries and wild rice.
2.4 Indigenous Food Sovereignty
Food sovereignty, or the increased control over food systems, has recently emerged
in the literature as a means of addressing food insecurity. Food sovereignty places
control over how, what, and when food is eaten with the people and encourages a
close relationship between production and consumption. The term food sovereignty
was devised by La Via Campesina, a group of land-based peasants, farmers, and
Indigenous people, in 1996 to protest the globalization of food systems (Wittman
et al. 2010). Yet despite the Indigenous roots of food sovereignty, there are gaps
around Indigenous food sovereignty in the literature (Rudolph and McLachlan 2013).
According to these authors, “This is especially true as it relates to the potential of food
sovereignty for Indigenous communities in Canada, with the important exception of
the Indigenous Peoples Working Group of Food Secure Canada (PFPP 2010) and the
British Columbia Indigenous Food Systems Network (IFSN 2012)” (Rudolph and
McLachlan 2013).
Indigenous food sovereignty (IFS) has been described as a “living reality” for
thousands of years however; colonial impacts and landscape changes have threatened
traditional and local food systems resulting, in part, in high levels of food insecurity
and a need to reconnect people to their food systems (Morrison 2011). According to
Morrison (2011), IFS is guided by four main principles: the recognition that food is
sacred; participation in food systems; self-determination; and supportive legislation and
policy. These principles recognize that food has an historical element for Indigenous
people; indeed, many IFS initiatives are centered on traditional food practices.
Relationship formation is an integral part of food sovereignty and it advocates for
new relationships not just among people, but between people and the land (Wittman,
et al. 2010). There is an integral gender component to food sovereignty and in fact
one of La Via Campesina’s food sovereignty campaigns involved a focus on ending
violence against women given the integral role of women as food providers (Wittman
et al. 2010). Relatedly, Patel (2012) has argued that one of food sovereignty’s greatest
strengths is its commitment to women’s rights. It is through this movement that
production is linked to consumption and that how food is produced is emphasized
(Desmarais 2003) which is embedded in relationships.
Within the context of Indigenous communities in Manitoba some important work
is underway around IFS. Kamal and Thompson (2013), for example, have documented
an Indigenous land-based food movement in O-Pipon-Na-Piwin, Manitoba. Rudolph
and McLachlan (2013) have also documented IFS initiatives in northern Manitoba.
To date, little information exists with regards to IFS in an urban context. The Urban
Aboriginal Garden Project at the University of British Columbia, one urban example,
found the garden to be a decolonizing experience for participants because it helped
reduce dependence (Mundel and Chapman 2010).

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

29

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

2.5 Winnipeg’s Indigenous Population and Food
Indigenous people in Canada experience high growth rates and in 2006 surpassed
the one million mark. The census indicates that Indigenous people represented 3.8%
of the Canadian population. Of this population, 60% identified themselves as First
Nations, 33% Métis and 4% Inuit (Statistics Canada 2008). The census also revealed
that more than 50% of this population were urban dwellers, an increase of 4% from
the 1996 figure.
Winnipeg has one of the largest urban Aboriginal populations in Canada. In 2006,
10% of Winnipeg’s population was comprised of Aboriginal people (Statistics Canada
2010). The National Household Survey identified a total of 86,600 First Nations, Metis
and Inuit people living in Winnipeg (total single and multiple Aboriginal ancestry
responses) (Statistics Canada 2011). The migration of Aboriginal people to Winnipeg
has fluctuated over the years, and the net population change can be attributed to three
factors: (a) natural increase (the excess of births over deaths), (b) net migration (people
coming into the city vs. people leaving the city) and (c) changes in how people identify
themselves in the census (Norris, Clatworthy, and Peters 2013).
Winnipeg exists at the junction of the Assiniboine and Red River and the name
originates from the Cree language which translates into “Win” meaning muddy and
“nipee” meaning water. The forking of these two large waterways resulted in a strategic
location for First Nations people to meet and trade with other First Nations people.
Winnipeg is also significant because it is surrounded by different First Nations groups
included Dene people from the northern part of the province, Swampy Cree from the
north and east, the Anishnaabe from the south and east, and the Dakota to the south,
and the Nakoda from the southwest (United Way 2010).
Winnipeg’s inner city is defined by the City of Winnipeg through the
Community Data Network to include areas to the north along Inkster Road, to the
east neighbourhoods such as South and North Point Douglas, North and Central St.
Boniface, and Chalmers, neighbourhoods in the south including Wolseley, McMillan,
and River Osborne and to the west, neighbourhoods east of McPhillips Avenue. The
official downtown is included in the inner city (City of Winnipeg, 2006). The inner
city of Winnipeg has the highest portion of urban Indigenous people. Census Canada
reports that 25,485 people reported having Aboriginal identity which represents 10%
of the population of Winnipeg, and 21% of the population of the inner city (City
of Winnipeg, 2006) and is also home to many urban Indigenous organizations
including the Indian and Metis Friendship Centre of Winnipeg. Winnipeg’s inner
city has shown marked economic and social disparities compared to other parts of
the city. Winnipeg’s north end within the inner city is in an impoverished area and
experiences “food deserts” as many grocery stores have moved out of the area resulting
in the experience of food insecurity for residents (Zurba et al. 2012). Socio-economic
problems “which are dynamic, inter-related and often not easily determined in terms
of cause and effect” are a challenge in Winnipeg’s north end (Zurba et al. 2012, 285).
Food aid is provided in the inner city (including the north end and downtown) in the
form of food banks and soup kitchens. However for longer term solutions to food
insecurity, nutrition education programs and community gardens may be developed by

30

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

non-profit organizations (Malabar and Grant 2010, North End Community Renewal
Corporation 2013). “The Good Food Box,” coordinated by the Winnipeg Foodshare
Co-op, provides various sized-boxes of fresh seasonal fruits and vegetables to inner city
residents with no profit earned. The Co-op provides free delivery purely as a service
to the community and customers pay only for the cost of the produce (Winnipeg
Foodshare Co-op 2013).
2.6 Urban Indigenous People and Culture
Silver (2006) describes the destruction of Aboriginal cultures as the “Canadian
government’s deliberate strategy from the late nineteenth and most of the twentieth
century with respect to Aboriginal people was assimilation” (Silver, 2006, p. 139).
Assimilation and urban migration are related processes. The variety of factors leading
Indigenous people to migrate to cities or remain in cities vary, as does the ways in
which people participate in activities that support culture. One persistent perception
exists is that once a person leaves a First Nations, Inuit or Metis community that they
leave their culture “behind”. As Restoule (2006) describes, these perceptions are related
to the lack of obvious visible symbols of culture such as dress, wild traditional foods,
and housing, however it is the values that provide the mechanism for cultural survival
and sustainability. Relatedly, a common perception is that the decision to migrate is
based on a rejection of traditional culture (Norris, Clatworthy, and Peters 2013). These
notions have also been shaped by indicators and measurements by Canada’s Supreme
Court who measure identity as being consistent with the activities and distinctive
culture of Indigenous populations at the time of contact (Newhouse and Fitzmaurice
2012). Wilson (2008) describes the shaping of cultural ideas as being molecular
memory and that being removed from practicing traditional lifestyles does not equate
to a loss of the underlying beliefs that shape a culture.
Urban communities across Canada have become centres of cultural identity
and resurgence, first evident in the development of Indian Friendship Centres. As
urban Indigenous people became increasingly mobilized, urban organizations began
to develop and flourish across Canada. Many of these organizations began as social
support organizations with a cultural focus, and have now grown to respond to the
prolific urban Indigenous arts, culture, business and education communities. Silver
(2006) describes the connection between healing, personal rebuilding, and revived
communities as being connected directly to the revitalization of Aboriginal culture
which coincides with the development and building of Aboriginal organizations.
Winnipeg is home to many Indigenous organizations that not only serve the
urban and remote/rural populations, but also play an integral role in the intercultural context of the city. The basis for much of this success is the grounding of
Aboriginal cultures within the organizations. Silver (2006) points to the success of
adult education programs in Winnipeg as due in part to the designing of educational
initiatives on the basis of Aboriginal culture. Settee (2013) describes the connection
between community development and sovereignty has been rooted in healing for
the “Aboriginal individual and spreads to the community agencies and government
structures” (Settee, 2013, p. 34).

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

31

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

2.7 Cultural Food and Health
As Indigenous people migrate from rural and remote communities to urban centres,
the immediate access to traditional or cultural foods is lessened with an increased
reliance on market foods (Socha et al. 2012). Many market foods have diminished
nutrition, however are sought out amongst populations with limited financial resources.
As such, many urban Indigenous people make unhealthy food choices out of necessity
(Power 2008, Socha et al. 2012). There is an abundance of literature which points to
the link between increased store bought food and the onset of chronic and lifestyle
related disease such as Type II diabetes, obesity and heart related illness (Kuhnlein and
Receveur 1996). Indigenous people in Canada experience higher rates of diabetes than
non-Indigenous, a condition attributed to the change in diet from the more nutritious
and health traditional foods to junk food. Food insecurity in Indigenous populations
has not only manifested through a lack of adequate and culturally accepted foods
but has also been noted in their low consumption of fruits and vegetables. Adekunle
et al. (2010, 2011, 2012) suggest that the consumption of vegetables contributes to
physical and mental well-being, and promotes health. The low consumption of fruits
and vegetables may be as result of economic factors, lack of variety in local stores, or
the negative perceptions about fruits and vegetables (Sharma et al. 2008). The link
between cultural food and health goes beyond sustenance for many First Nations
people:
Traditionally, Aboriginal diets and consumption patterns arose from
complex and holistic food systems that provided health benefits beyond
nutriton. Culture—a determinant of health, is intricately tied to
traditional Aboriginal foods. Not only are traditional foods valued from
cultural, spiritual and health perspectives, but the activities involved in
their acquisition and distribution allow for the practice of cultural values
such as sharing and cooperation. (Earle 2011, 3)
Scholars such as Willows et al. (2011) discuss the link between food, culture and
spirituality:
The cultural worldview held by some Aboriginal peoples is that
traditional food by its very nature is health promoting and good to eat.
For this reason, in addition to nourishing the body, traditional food—
as compared to commercial food—has the advantage of nourishing the
mind and spirit, being an anchor to culture and personal well-being, and
is an essential agent to promote holistic health. (Willows et al. 2011, 6)
Food and health are indelibly linked. Food is at the source of preventative health.
One of the ways in which to achieve it is through a healthy diet consisting of nutrient
dense foods, including fruits and vegetables, which provide vitamins, minerals, and
fibre which can reduce the risk of chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and
cancer (CDC 2012). Some of the problems that may be associated from nutritional
deficiencies when eating too much protein, fats and sugars, and not enough of the
nutrients provided by fruits and vegetables (vitamins, minerals, fibre, micronutrients)
32

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

can include diabetes, obesity, and other metabolic disorders (Hung et al. 2004). Almost
three in ten Indigenous adults live in food-insecure households (off reserve) and
these households tend to report in general much poorer health (36% poor health in
food insecure I(Hung et al. 2004). ndigenous households compared to food secure
Indigenous households (21%) (Willows et al. 2011). The issue of household food
insecurity is an important predictor of “suboptimal dietary intakes and compromised
health and well-being” (Willows et al. 2011).
3. Methods
Indigenous people have challenged academic researchers to decolonize their research
relationships with Indigenous people so that academic research begins to meet the
needs and priorities of Indigenous people themselves (Pualani 2007). Collaborative
research practices involving Indigenous organizations may begin to address some of
these concerns (Howitt 2001). We began this research by working with Winnipeg
Indian and Metis Friendship Centre personnel.
An Indigenous graduate student from the University of Manitoba was hired as
the primary data collector as she had an extensive network of friends, family and peers
who were either working in food related areas, or who had a vast knowledge of food
security/food sovereignty issues in the city. Because of her network and pre-established
relationship with participants, issues around trust and access were not barriers, however
protective measures were offered including the control and review of transcripts.
Interviews were conducted with the blessing of the participants, and in the location
of their choosing. Three focus groups were held with a set of questions focussing on
not only access to cultural foods in the city but also a discussion of the connection
between cultural food and larger well-being. In addition, ten interviews were held with
participants answering similar questions. The interviews were transcribed and coded.
Participants were primarily from the inner city including downtown Winnipeg and
the north end, all were Indigenous and all were working in the area of food security
and education.
4. Findings
Food, culture and health are linked. The impact of colonialism on Indigenous food
systems is well noted in the literature within a rural, remote, northern and reserve
context. The gap in literature is consistent with the notion that as people migrate
from remote, rural communities into urban centres, their access to goods and services
increases. Participants also made the link between food, culture and health. The three
key areas identified by participants as being pertinent to Indigenous food security
in Winnipeg include: (1) growing, harvesting, preparing and eating cultural food as
ceremony, (2) cultural food as a part of connection to land through reciprocity and (3)
re-learning IFS practices to address food insecurity.
1. Growing, Harvesting, Preparing, Eating and Sharing Cultural Food as Ceremony
Participants described a spiritual connection to cultural food. They reminisced about
participating in food production and consumption; however these stories went beyond
CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

33

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

a nostalgic return to the “old ways.” Respondents identified the process of growing,
harvesting, or catching of food as having a spiritual element which is consistent with
the work by Receveur et al. (1998) describing the role of mentoring cultural practices
and spirituality to children. This is also aligned closely with the work of Baskin et
al. (2009) where urban Toronto Aboriginal women made the connection between
cultural food and cultural knowledge transmission to children. The knowledge and
understanding associated with growing and nurturing your own food is connected to
a larger understanding of the relationship between the environment, spirituality and
people. This was described by a participant:
That understanding is something that I would like people to have—the
cycle of the food, and where it comes from, and why we do what we do.
It’s about respect—especially the respect—and respect of the growth. It’s
another life that you’re bringing and growing, and you’re harvesting that
life form in a respectful way and putting it in your body. There’s that
circle of life happening.
One of our respondents described the relationship she has with fish: “with salmon,
it’s kind of like going to communion because it’s the one food that I feel the spirit in.”
Another respondent described the process of cooking and eating food as a part of a
ritual: “to me that is a cultural food, and there is a ritual that goes with it. Whenever a
relative would come by and give my mom deer meat, moose meat or fish, it was always
a big deal to cook that up and have everybody come over and eat.”
The ceremony described by participants related also to the experience of
relationship building that comes with sharing traditional food. As one respondent
noted “I think it’s the way people enjoy it, and come together to enjoy it. With cultural
food come community, fellowship, family and ritual.” The ritual and ceremony around
eating was described extensively by one participant.
The elders where I come from were very strict about the ritual; how the
food came out, how things happened, how you came in, how you left,
how you sat, where you sat, how you held a sacred item or what you did
with it, or how you said something. When everyone was together and
the elders started talking, everyone stopped, and was quiet and listened.
The young people had to get up and serve the elders, and there were tiny
offerings of food that we would make to the spirits. It’s symbolic, and it
shows gratitude. It says thank you for looking out for us, we appreciate
and we give this thanks.
One participant described the relationship with food as a spiritual process: “It
wasn’t the food itself that was important; it was what we did with it, how we interacted
with it, how we learned about it, and how we were thankful for it. It became a spiritual
process.”
When food harvesting, preparation and consumption contain an element of
ceremony and spirituality, a different kind of intention becomes embodied. Careful
consideration of techniques, and an appreciation for the broader connections between
34

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

food, land and past and future generations become a part of the connection to food. This
intention is evident in the description of one participant’s observation of her mother’s
cooking techniques: “when my mom prepared food for ceremonies, like bannock or
stew, she would take the ingredients, even the peas, and she would hold on to them,
she would pray with them, and then put them in. She would take the greatest care
with every single item.” The principles of IFS are connected to the sacredness of food
as described by these participants (Morrison 2011). Another participant described
participating in ceremonies and the role that cultural food plays and how it connects
people:
I do a lot of traditional work with traditional people—sweat lodges,
Sundance, and other ceremonies—and a lot of it involves food, specifically
traditional foods. I do have a lot of access in that regard, not as food
security but as my own path if you want to call it that. At powwows they
have foods—a “wild feed” they call it in the States. It’s a feast.
Participants also described the places in which they consumed cultural foods. At
many gatherings and feasts, cultural foods are highly valued. One participant describes
what a family gathering looks like in terms of cultural food:
The majority of the time I bring something like berries. It’s like a potluck,
and maybe the host would have the meat, usually a stew of some sort.
Somebody else brings bannock. It doesn’t mean you have to always eat
traditional food, as long as you acknowledge the ceremony and put that
spirit plate out. But the majority of the time we do have at least one
wild food, what we call traditional food. And most of the time that’s me
bringing the berries. Blueberries are my favorite. I eat one cup every day.
2. Cultural Food as a Part of Connection to Land Through Reciprocity
Obtaining access to traditional food in the city is different than for people living in
rural and reserve communities. In some cases, participants were from communities
near the city, but in other cases, participants were from rural and remote communities.
Being in the city has meant that many participants act as a host to family and friends
who are visiting the urban centre. Participants described being “gifted” with food such
as wild meat (bison, moose meat or fish) or as a part of larger family exchange. One
participant described this:
There is an assumption about people in the community, that if you are no
longer hunters or gatherers or fishers, you are totally disconnected from
your traditional food. I say that’s not true because I get it through my
relatives, and I am still connected through them. I don’t go personally
shoot a moose, but I will eat moose when my relatives hunt and they
send me some.
Participants also discussed participating in urban gardening programs or Community Shared Agriculture programs (CSAs). Informal economic transactions were
CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

35

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

also discussed including the role of bartering. As one participant described, the practice
of bartering is also related to traditional teachings around reciprocity:
I also barter now instead of taking cash for my teachings. People will
bring me meats or yarn, and then there’s less of the “I bought you” attitude.
The person asking or the teachings has to go out and actually participate
in getting that product for me. That tells me that they actually respect
the knowledge enough to do so. I found that it made the teachings too
commercial. People love it. I had a guy last year that dries rabbit and he
loved dried peaches, so I dried a bunch of organic peaches and other
fruits for him in exchange for two rabbits.
In an urban context, being able to access cultural foods is a challenge. As one
participant described: “my access to traditional foods comes from both of my parents.
So even if I worked at McDonalds, I would still have the exact same access to traditional
foods.” For our participants who were working in areas of food, they found it less of a
challenge. Other participants described being creative in developing networks:
I don’t have family or friends at all, but I find it still happens because
you’re in food. When you’re on the bus and you start a conversation about
the crate of onions you’re carrying, you find out that the other person has
a friend that has a whole bunch of this or that and they want to trade.
Facebook is good too.
Participants also described the importance of relationships not only to those who
harvested the food, but for the larger process of food giving up its life to support people.
Understanding the importance of reciprocity between the provider and receiver of the
food is about cultural exchanges. One respondent describes this reciprocity: “are we
respectfully honouring and giving thanks to that food and where it comes from? Those
are the most important parts.”
Participants identified the consumption of traditional food as facilitating cultural
values such as sharing and responsibility which was also identified by Receveur et al.
(1998). Several participants described the need to start developing an awareness of
IFS with children. For example, a participant stated: “We need to re-involve children
in the miracle and circle of life and understanding, so they will see the importance of
traditional foods, and what is traditional to them.” Another participant described the
need for children to be better connected to food systems:
Every child should plant things, and they should be aware of the whole
process leading up to eating it. If you have a relationship with your food,
like peas, beans or squash, you have a new way of being grateful and
showing that gratitude when you eat. People need to really understand
the circle of life, and that we are a part of it. We are not more important
than plants, fish, birds or animals; we are part of it all, and every part is
important. Until that respect is there, traditional foods will continue to die.
Part of tradition is who we are inside, and those plants can only nourish
36

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

us totally if we are part of that circle of life. To bring back traditional
ways, we need to show our kids how to plant gardens, whether it’s what
was planted 200 years ago, or a new kind of food that the Europeans
brought…We need our children to understand the habitats of animals,
and to learn to live in harmony with them.
3. Re-learning IFS to Address Food Insecurity
Access to cultural food in the city is about alleviating food insecurity, but also about
a larger reclamation and connection to food and food production. Indigenous food
sovereignty (IFS) goes beyond food security in that it looks to reconnect people and
their food systems and is guided by four main principles: (1) the recognition that food
is sacred; (2) participation in food systems; (3) self-determination; and (4) supportive
legislation and policy (Morrison 2011). One participant describes the sacred element
of IFS: “the spirit of the food is very different. I think it connects with your body in
a way that is genetic. I believe that we have a genetic memory of eating, especially
fishers.” Respondents discussed the relationship between control over food sources,
cultural connections as distinctive elements of IFS.
One respondent described how IFS has been impacted by larger forces of
assimilation. She described the connection between Indian Residential Schools and
food:
That was the piece that really interrupted our food sovereignty (residential
schools), and our relationship to growing what we eat, and even the
hunting. I look around now and there are hunters on the reserves and in
the community, but I don’t have that kind of connection to them anymore.
Another respondent described the shift to urban centres as being one of the forces
that limits food sovereignty not only because of the loss of land to practice land based
harvesting: “the move to the city is a downward trend where you’re deskilling and
you don’t have access to land for gardening…I see my generation as completely deskilled and totally dependent on commercial source of food and on having money
to buy food.” This “de-skilling” as described by participants is something that they
described as needing to be taught at earlier ages: “how do you re-reteach these cultural
connections to the younger generations? How do we teach them about food and how
it’s part of their ancestry and culture? These things are significant.” One focus group
participant described an experience of trapping with his daughters:
When I took my daughters out trapping, one daughter put her snare up
high—about a foot and a half off the ground. I tried to encourage her to
put it lower because it would have to be a really big rabbit to get caught
in it! As it turned out it snowed that night—all the way up to that trap—
and she was the only one who ended up catching a rabbit! There was
something inside of her that just knew…it was in her genes.

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

37

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

Another participant describes operationalizing IFS principles in an urban context.
He describes how harvesting practices like maple syrup is possible in an urban context:
I know of guys that actually tap the maples in the city. There is a
misconception that if a plant is inside the city then you can’t eat it
because of contaminants. But those plants take those contaminants and
convert them into good medicine for the body. Our Native tea plants
will take arsenic from the soil and convert it into selenium, which is what
we need. Just because the soil is bad, doesn’t mean what you plant in it is
going to be bad. It matters in how its cared for.
IFS is also related to a return to health for Indigenous people. While the poor health
of Indigenous people is well documented with high rates of chronic and infectious
disease (Waldram, Herring, and Young 2006), much of the chronic disease that is so
prevalent in Indigenous communities is preventable, and related to the consumption of
low nutrient quality food. One participant describes the rates of disease in relationship
to urbanization and food patterns shifting: “The minute we left the community and
entered the city we started eating differently…our whole diet changed. On came the
diabetes, high blood pressure and other problems because of food that our body wasn’t
used to. We couldn’t process it properly.”
5. Conclusion
As Indigenous people continue to flock to cities, and lifestyle related illnesses continue
to escalate, the need to address the foundational issues become pressing. The cultural
food needs of Winnipeg’s diverse and growing Indigenous population are not being
met. Winnipeg’s inner city is home to vast food deserts, and many urban Indigenous
people have little choices available for healthy and nutritious food. Food insecurity
is only one part of the larger issue. Being disconnected from food coincides with a
disconnection from culture and contributes to poor mental, physical, emotional, and
spiritual health. In an urban context, revitalizing the ability of community members
to address food insecurity through IFS is one way to move beyond the issue of food as
being about immediate sustenance.
Operationalizing IFS principles in an urban context is a challenge and cannot be
considered inside a vacuum. The importance of re-building a culture of Indigenous
food is indeed possible in the city, and requires the same resiliency and creativeness
that has been the source of the flourishing of Indigenous populations despite repeated
obstacles. Much of these efforts require a focus on consciousness shifting which
happens when families, including parents, uncles, aunties, and grandparents, re-learn
and share IFS with children. We can look to many urban and inner city organizations
in Winnipeg as facilitators of this re-learning or re-skilling through many programs
that encourage reinventing food that both celebrates Indigenous traditions, but also
considers larger health implications of IFS. By re-situating our relationship to food
by returning to the ceremony of food production, processing and consumption, by
celebrating the gift of food as a part of a larger reciprocal arrangement with the land,
IFS can become more operational, particularly in an urban, Aboriginal context. As one
38

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

participant described, this work is important, and the conversation about IFS is about
planting seeds, and connecting younger generations to older generations:
It needs to be taught—especially to our kids. There are people that are
open and seeking it and that’s really important. I didn’t see it much for
a long time, but it’s more noticeable in the last ten years. When I was
in school I searched for it. It makes me happy to know that it’s coming
back and that people are talking about it and discussing it, and telling
the old stories about it. I think just having that space available for people
to begin to talk about it. It’s not something in history: it is alive and well
and continuing. It is possible to live a good life and to get back to the
original ways in terms of the spirituality of the food and what exactly
that means. There are ways of doing it that makes it healthier. My hope is
to be able to see that happen. It’s about slowly planting seeds and getting
people to think about it. I see that as my job.
Acknowledgements
We would like to gratefully acknowledge the Indian and Metis Friendship Centre of
Winnipeg ( Jim Sinclair) as well as University of Winnipeg Anthropology students
Janaya Rieger, David Syvitski and Kacey Fields. This project was generously funded by
the Urban Aboriginal Knowledge Network (SSHRC), Manitoba Research Alliance
(SSHRC), Government of Manitoba Ministry of Indigenous Affairs, University of
Winnipeg Major Research Award, University of Winnipeg Partnership Development
Grant, and the University of Winnipeg Discretionary Grant.
Notes
1

In Canada, Section 35 of the Constitution recognizes Aboriginal people as three
distinctive peoples: First Nations, Inuit and Métis. First Nation began to be used in
Canada in the 1970s to replace the term Indian. This term typically applies to both
Status and non-Status Indians. Inuit refers to a cultural group of people living in far
northern regions in territories such as Nunavut, parts of Labrador, Quebec and the
Northwest Territories. Inuit people are not a part of the Indian Act, and have Inuit
beneficiary cards instead of Indian Status cards. Métis is a more problematic term.
It refers both to historically created communities along the Red River in Manitoba
and Saskatchewan created by mixed unions between French and Scottish fur traders
and Native people and in some cases, to contemporary unions between non-Native
and Native people. Métis organizations grant people membership cards if they can
prove an ancestral link to a historical Métis community. The term “Indigenous” is now
increasingly used in the literature, and when used in a Canadian context, refers to First
Nations and Inuit people. However for the purposes of this paper, Indigenous and
Aboriginal will be used synonymously. Many people live “off reserve,” which may refer
to people living in urban centres or in rural areas. The term rural refers to areas that are
non-reserve, and are either “remote or wilderness areas and agricultural lands, small
towns and villages with populations of less than 1000 people and population densities
of less than 400 people per square kilometer” (Statistics Canada, 2003: 18).
CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

39

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

2

It is important to note that we do not see Aboriginal people as an ethnic group.
However some of the literature on ethnicity and food preferences may be useful in
providing a background for the proposed research.
References
Abdel-Ghany, M., and D. L. Sharpe. 1997. Consumption patterns among ethnic groups
in Canada. Journal of Consumer Studies and Home Economics 21 (2): 215–223.
Adekunle, B., G. Filson and S. Sethuratnam. 2010. Preferences for ethno-cultural foods
in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA): A market research. Unpublished manuscript,
OMIF/FarmStart/GTAAAC, Guelph, Ontario: University of Guelph.
Adekunle, B., G. Filson, S. Sethuratnam and D. Cidro. 2011. Acculturation and
consumption: Examining the consumption behavior of people of Afro-Caribbean
descent in Canada. Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development
2 (1): 297–313.
Adekunle, D., G. Filson and S. Sethuratnam. 2012. Culturally appropriate vegetables
and economic development. A contextual analysis. Appetite 59 (12): 148-154.
Baskin, C.A., B. Guarisco, R. Koleszar-Green, N. Melanson and C. Osawamick.
2009. Struggles, Strengths and Solutions: Exploring Food Security with Young
Aboriginal Moms. Esurio: Journal of Hunger and Poverty 1(1).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2012. A Look Inside Food Deserts.
Retrieved fromhttp://www.cdc.gov/features/fooddeserts. Accessed March 27,
2013.
Che, J., and J. Chen. 2001. Food insecurity in Canadian households. Health Reports
(Statistics Canada, Catalogue 82-003-XIE) 12 (4): 11-21.
City of Winnipeg. 2006. 2006 Census Data: Inner City. Retrieved October 28, 2014
http://winnipeg.ca/Census/2006/City%20of%20Winnipeg/Inner%20City/
Inner%20City.pdf
Cummins, S. C. J., and S. Macintyre. 2005. Food environments and obesity:
Neighbourhood or nation? International Journal of Epidemiology 35: 100-104.
Cuthand, D. 2012. Government response to rapporteur disappointing. The Star Phoenix.
Published: Friday, May 18, 2012. www2.canada.com/saskatoonstarphoenix/news/
forum/story.html?id=04a49618-3248-47c5-bbdb-1a295840e61e.
Desmarais, A. 2003. The Via Campesina: Peasant Women on the Frontiers of Food
Sovereignty. Canadian Womens Studies 23(1): 140-145.
Donkin, A. J. M., E.A. Dowler, S.J. Stevenson and S. A. Turner. 2000. Mapping access
to food in a deprived area: The development of price and availability indices. Public
Health Nutrition 3: 31-38.
Earle, L. 2011. Traditional Aboriginal Diets and Health. Prince George: National
Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Environics Institute. 2011. Urban Aboriginal Peoples Study: Winnipeg Report. Environics
Institute: Toronto.
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2010. The State of
Food Insecurity in the World: Addressing Food Insecurity in Protracted Crises.
Office of Knowledge Exchange, Research and Extension: Rome.
Health Canada. 2007. Eating Well with Canada’s Food Guide – First Nations, Inuit and
40

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

Metis. Ottawa: Health Canada. Catalogue Number H34-159/2007E-PDF.
Howitt, R. 2001. Constructing engagement: Geographical education for justice within
and beyond the tertiary classroom. Journal of Geography in Higher Education 25:
147-166.
Hung, Hsin-Chia, Kaumudi Joshipura, Rui Jiang, Frank B. Hu, David Hunter,
Stephanie A. Smith-Warner, Graham A. Colditz, Bernard Rosner, Donna
Spiegelman, Walter C. Willet. 2004. Fruit and Vegetable Intake and Risk of Major
Chronic Disease. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 96 (21), 1577-1584.
IFSN (Indigenous Food Systems Network). 2012. Available from www.
indigenousfoodsystems.org/ [Accessed 28 October 2014].
Kamal, A. G., and S. Thompson. 2013. Recipe for decolonization and resurgence: Story
of O-Pipon-Na-Piwin Cree Nation’s indigenous food sovereignty movement.
Conference Paper #46, Food Sovereignty: Critical Dialogue. Yale University.
biowww2.biology.yale.edu/agrarianstudies/foodsovereignty/pprs/46_Kamal_
Thompson_2013.pdf.
Kuhnlein, H.V. and O. Receveur. 1996. Dietary change and traditional food systems of
Indigenous peoples. Annual Review of Nutrition 16: 417-42.
Lambden, J., O. Receveur, and Kuhniein, H. V. 2007. Traditional food attributes must
be included in studies of food security in the Canadian Arctic. International
Journal of Circumpolar Health 66 (4): 308-319.
Malabar, M. and K. Grant. 2010. North End Food Assessment Report Winnipeg.
Winnipeg: Manitoba Food Matters.
McIntyre, L., and K. Rondeau. 2009. Food Insecurity. In Social Determinants of Health,
ed. D. Raphel 2009, 188-204. Toronto, ON: Canadian Scholars Press.
McIntyre L, Connor S.K and J. Warren. 2000. Child hunger in Canada: results of the
1994 National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth. Canadian Medical
Association Journal 163: 961–965.
Mercille G, O. Receveur and L. Potvin. 2012. Household food insecurity and Canadian
Aboriginal women’s self-efficacy in food preparation. Canadian Journal of Dietetic
Practice and Research 73 (3): 134-140.
Morrison, D. 2011. Indigenous food sovereignty: a model for social learning. In Food
sovereignty in Canada: creating just and sustainable food systems, ed. H. Wittman,
A.Desmarais and N. Wiebe 2011, 97–113. Halifax, NS: Fernwood Publishing.
Mundel, E., & G. E. Chapman. 2010. A decolonizing approach to health promotion in
Canada: The case of the Urban Aboriginal Community Kitchen Garden Project.
Health Promotion International 25 (2): 166-173.
Newhouse, D. and K. Fitzmaurice. 2012. Introduction: Aboriginal People in the City:
From the Study of Problems to Community Engagement and the Fostering of
Mino-Biimaadiziwin. In Well Being in the Urban Aboriginal Community, ed. D.
Newhouse, K. Fitzmaurice, T. McGuire-Adams and D. Jette 2012, ix-xxi. Toronto:
Thompson Educational Publishing.
Norris, M.J., Clatworthy, S. and E. Peters. 2013. The Urbanization of Aboriginal
Peoples in Canada: A Half Century in Review. In Indigenous in the city:
contemporary identities and cultural innovation, ed. E. Peters and C. Andersen
2013, 29-45. Vancouver: UBC Press.
CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

41

Canadian Journal of Urban Research / Revue canadienne de recherche urbaine

North End Community Renewal Corporation. 2013. North End Community Renewal
Corporation Annual Report: 2012-2013. Winnipeg: NECRC.
Patel, R.C. 2012. Food Sovereignty: Power, Gender and the Right to Food. PLoS Med
9(6): 1-4.
PFPP (People’s Food Policy Project). 2010. First principles protocol for building
cross-cultural relationships [online]. Available from foodsecurecanada.org/sites/
foodsecurecanada.org/files/First_Principles_July_2010.pdf [Accessed 28 October
2014].
Peters, E.J., and McCreary, T. A. 2008. Poor neighbourhoods and the changing
geography of food retailing in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 1984-2004. Canadian
Journal of Urban Research 18(1): 78-106.
Pualani Louis, R. 2007. Can You Hear Us Now? Voices from the margin: Using
Indigenous methodologies in geographic research. Geographical Research 45:
130-139.
Power, E. M. 2008. Conceptualizing food security for Aboriginal people in Canada.
Canadian Journal of Public Health 99 (2): 95-97.
Receveur, O., N. Kassi, H.M. Chan, P.R. Berti, and H.V. Kuhniein. 1998. Yukon First
Nations’ Assessment of Dietary Benefits/Risks. Montreal: Centre for Indigenous
People’s Nutrition and Environment, McGill University.
Restoule, J. P. 2006. Learning About Urban Male Aboriginal Identity Formation
Using Circle Methodology. L’Association Canadienne pour l’Étude de
l’Éducation des Adultes (ACÉÉA) Canadian Association for the Study of
Adult Education (CASAE) 2006 National Conference On-Line Proceedings
York University. Toronto, Ontario. May 28 to May 30.
Rudolph, K.R. and S. McLachlan. 2013. Seeking Indigenous food sovereignty:
origins of and responses to the food crisis in northern Manitoba, Canada.
Local Environment: The International Journal of Justice and Sustainability 18(9):
1079-1098.
Settee, P. 2013. Pimatisiwin: The Good Life, Global Indigenous Knowledge Systems.
Vernon, BC: J Charlton Publishing.
Sharma, S., X. Cao, J. Gittelsohn, L.S. Ho, E. Ford, A. Rosecrans, S. Harris, A.J. Hanley,
and B. Zinman. 2008. Dietary intake and development of a quantitative foodfrequency questionnaire for a lifestyle intervention to reduce the risk of chronic
diseases in Canadian First Nations in north-western Ontario. Public Health
Nutrition 11(8): 831-40.
Silver, J. 2006. In Their Own Voices: Building Urban Aboriginal Communities. Black Point,
NS: Fernwood Publishing.
Sinclaire, M. B. 1997. Barriers to food procurement: The experience of urban Aboriginal
women in Winnipeg. Dissertation. Winnipeg, MB: University of Winnipeg.
Smoyer-Tomic, K. E., J. Spence, and C. Amrhein. 2006. Food deserts in the Prairies?
Supermarket accessibility and neighbourhood need in Edmonton, Canada. The
Professional Geographer 58: 307-326.
Socha, T., Mehdi Z., Chambers, L., Abraham, R. and Teri Fiddler. 2012. Food security
in a northern First Nations community: An exploratory study on food availability
and accessibility. Journal of Aboriginal Health 8 (2): 5-14.
42

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indigenous Food Sovereignty in Winnipeg

Statistics Canada. 2008. Aboriginal peoples in Canada in 2006: Inuit, Metis and First
Nations, 2006 Census (97 – 558 - XIE).
Statistics Canada. 2010. 2006 Census dictionary. Catalogue no. 92-556-X. Ottawa:
Statistics Canada.
Statistics Canada. 2011. National Household Survey, Statistics Canada Catalogue no.
99-011-X2011029.
United Way. 2010. Eagle’s Eye View: An Environmental Scan of the Aboriginal Community
in Winnipeg. United Way: Winnipeg.
Waldram, J. B., A. Herring, and T. K. Young. 2006. Aboriginal Health in Canada:
Historical, Cultural, and Epidemiological Perspectives. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
Wang, L., and L. Lo. 2007. Immigrant grocery-shopping behavior: Ethnic identity
versus accessibility. Environment and Planning A 39 (3): 684–699.
Willows, N. D. 2005. Determinants of healthy eating in Aboriginal peoples in Canada:
the current state of knowledge and research gaps. Canadian Journal of Public Health,
Supplement 96: 32-36.
Willows, N., P. Veugelers, K. Raine, and S. Kuhle. 2011. Associations between
household and Food Insecurity and Health Outcomes in the Aboriginal
Population (Excluding Reserves). Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 82-003-X.
Wilson, K. 2003. Therapeutic landscapes and First Nations peoples: An exploration of
culture, health and place. Health and Place 9: 83-93.
Wilson, S. 2008. Research as Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods. Winnipeg:
Fernwood.
Winnipeg Foodshare Co-Op. 2013. winnipegfoodsharecoop.org/about/.
Wittman, H., Desmarais, A., and Wiebe, N. 2010. The origins and potential of food
sovereignty. In Food Sovereignty: Reconnecting Food, Nature, and Community, ed. H.
Wittman, A. Desmarais and N. Wiebe. Halifax, NS: Fernwood Publishing, 1-12.
Wrigley, N., D. Warm and B. Margetts. 2003. Deprivation, diet, and food-retail access:
Findings from the Leeds ‘food desert’ study. Environment and Planning A 35:
151–88.
Zurba, M., D. Islam, D. Smith and S. Thompson. 2012. Food and healing: an urban
community food security assessment for the North End of Winnipeg. Urban
Research and Practice 5 (2): 284-289.

CJUR summer 24:1 2015

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:13:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

43


