---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Canada, white supremacy, and the twinning of empires
Author(s): John Price
Source: International Journal , December 2013, Vol. 68, No. 4 (December 2013), pp. 628638
Published by: Sage Publications, Ltd. on behalf of the Canadian International Council
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24709363
Canada,
white white
supremacy,
and the and the
twinning
of empires

Abstract

Taking a transnational approach, this essay explores the dynamic circuits of glob
racisms, resistance, and imperial politics that obliged Canadian policymakers t
secure racist exclusions while simultaneously obscuring them. The case studies exam
ined in this essay—British Columbia's denial of the franchise to First Nations an
Chinese, adoption of the Natal Act, and the comprehensive federal exclusions adopted

after the 1907 white race riots in Vancouver—illustrate how racist immigration policie

both provincial and federal, had to take into account resistance and international factor

as perceived by the British Colonial Office. Taken in conjunction with Indigenous his

tory, the history of transpacific migration to Canada offers important insights into th

role of white supremacy in a colonial settler state such as Canada.

Keywords
Pacific Canada, immigration, racism, anti-racism, exclusions, empire, Natal Act,
franchise, 1907 Vancouver riot, white supremacy

Wherever we turn, we are confronted by Canada's colonial past: Idle No More,
court decisions regarding land claims, the murdered women inquiry, and revela
tions about residential schools and scientific experiments on First Nations peoples
are constant reminders of the country's colonial legacy. The revelations of social
history regarding indigeneity, patriarchy, and elitism are like burrs in the saddle of
traditionalists—irritatingly disrupting the narrative of Canada's smooth transition
from colony to nation.

Seldom integrated into the critique, however, are the intersections of social his
tory with the politics of race and empire. As legal historian Constance Backhouse

Corresponding author:
John Price, Department of History, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 3045, Stn CSC, Victoria, BC, V8W
3P4, Canada.

Email: joprice@uvic.ca

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

629

Price

reminds us, Canada's political and academic landscape is marked by an "ideology
of racelessness."1 Fortunately, postcolonial scholars have begun to address these
questions, and there is a greater focus on the intersections of gender, class, and
race. This essay offers a postcolonial perspective on the local/global connections in

Canadian history with particular focus on how transpacific events and relation
ships shaped the country. The emerging history of Pacific Canada supplements the
growing understanding of Indigenous history and its aftermath. Together, the two
illuminate how colonialism and racism came together to fundamentally shape both

Canada and the modern world. Paradoxically, probing this difficult terrain also
allows us to identify alternative role models in all communities, the lived lives that
illuminate paths to a better future.

Indigeneity and Pacific Canada
Canada's consolidation as a white settler state was not pre-ordained: on the Pacific
edges of the empire there was for many years a great mingling of peoples.2 There,

Europeans were a minority in the pre-confederation era. However, racial anxieties
and the desire of male, British elites to consolidate control soon gave birth to the
demand for a "White" Canada.

Thus, in 1872, when the new province of British Columbia's provincial legisla
ture convened, a sharp debate focused on whether male voters had to be able to
read. In an attempt to enlarge their support among whites, the legislators had
eliminated property ownership as a qualification for voting; but for some, the
literacy requirement was a means by which to restrict aboriginal and Chinese resi
dents from voting. As one early legislator put it, he did "not wish to put ourselves

shoulder to shoulder with the untutored savage. He thought our position with
respect to the Indians was very anomalous."3
Another opponent of removing the literacy requirement went further, asserting,

"we might, after next election, see an Indian occupying the Speaker's Chair, or
have a Chinese majority in the House."4 The vote to eliminate the literacy require
ment passed 12 to nine. What turned the tide was the suggestion that another way

could be found to prevent the "others" from voting. A statute excluding "Indians
and Chinese" from registering vital statistics (births, deaths, and marriages) had
been debated the day before (clarifying that "any person with any white blood in
his veins was not an Indian") and passed third reading earlier in the afternoon.
With that exclusion already on the books as a precedent, the 21 legislators easily
and unanimously passed a subsequent bill "excluding" the Indians and Chinese
from voting.5 And so it was that propertyless and illiterate white men gained the
1. Constance Backhouse, Colour-Coded: A Legal History of Racism in Canada (Toronto: Osgoode
Society for Canadian Legal History/University of Toronto Press, 1999), 14.
2. Adele Perry, On the Edge of Empire: Gender, Race, and the Making of British Columbia, 1849-1871
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2001) 13-15.
3. "First Provincial Legislative Assembly," The British Colonist, 6 April 1872, 2.
4. Ibid., 2.
5. Ibid.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

630

International Journal 68(4)

right to vote, and BC's others, the Chinese and "Indian" males, saw their franchise
taken way. Racial categories and exclusions that had begun as a white-Indigenous
binary had expanded, adding to strong gender biases.
The legislators who passed this bill expressed noble sentiments of equality with

the poor and illiterate and believed that they were very much on the side of the
angels. But this was not egalitarianism so much as racial solidarity in an age of

anxiety, when "white" Canadians numbered about 20,000 in the face of an
Aboriginal population of 45,000.6 As migration from Asia continued, so too did
racial hardening. Japanese and South Asians were added to Indians and Chinese on
the list of those ineligible to vote. In the eyes of the law, all Asians became part of

the unassimilable other. And although women had begun to lobby for the fran
chise, they did so only for white women.

Throughout this process, First Nations and those of Asian heritage, often with
support from allies, challenged white supremacy in various ways. For example,
in 1900, Tomey Homma, a naturalized Japanese Canadian, challenged the ban
on voting. After he won in the BC courts, the BC government appealed to the
British Privy Council and the justices ruled against him.7 The judgment relied on
precedents regarding the exclusion of women from voting and US law designed to
"accommodate the demands of slave states to preserve local control over the attri
butes of citizenship in order to maintain racial boundaries."8 The BC and British
governments relied on the biases of gender and race to enforce the politics of white
supremacy.

Resistance such as Tomey Homma's and Indigenous assertions of fishing and
hunting rights prompted further measures of control. Taking the "Indian out of the

child" in residential schools, created by virtue of the 1876 Indian Act, was one
solution. Stopping Asians from coming to Canada altogether was another.

Globalizing exclusions
In the winter of 1908, two Japanese men attempting to land in Vancouver were
arrested and detained under the terms of the British Columbia Immigration Act.
They contested their detention in an appeal to the BC Supreme Court. In his ruling

of 21 February, Justice C.J. Hunter noted that the two men were "subjects of the
Emperor of Japan" and questioned the validity of the BC legislation "which I shall
refer to as the Natal Act."9 Why would a judge refer to a provincial law as the
6. Accurate statistics remain somewhat elusive for this era. For a detailed discussion, see Perry, On the
Edge of Empire, 9-14.
7. For a detailed account of the challenge and the Privy Council decision that denial of the franchise
was legal, see Andrea Geiger Adams, "Writing racial barriers into law: Upholding B.C.'s denial of
the vote to its Japanese Canadian citizens, Homma v. Cunningham, 1902," in Louis Fiset and Gail
M. Nomura, eds, Nikkei in the Pacific Northwest: Japanese Americans and Japanese Canadians in
the Twentieth Century (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2005), 20-43.
8. Andrea Geiger, Subverting Exclusions: Transpacific Encounters with Race, Caste and Borders, 1885
1928 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2011), e-book version, position 3000.

9. Re Nakane and Okazake, British Columbia Supreme Court, 13 B.C.R. 370.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

631

Price

Natal Act when Natal was in Africa? A close examination reveals that a global

circuit existed for the construction of racist exclusions.10

Between 1887 and 1937, the British government convened 15 colonial and
imperial conferences. '1 At these conferences, the British secretary of state for the

colonies met with the prime ministers of Canada, New South Wales, Victoria,

New Zealand, Queensland, Cape Colony, South Australia, Newfoundland,
Tasmania, Western Australia, and Natal. This was a white man's club of the settler

colonies with the other "coloured" colonies unrepresented. One of the main topics
of discussion at the 1897 conference was "Alien Immigration" and, in addressing
the subject, Joseph Chamberlain remarked, "We quite sympathize with the deter
mination of the white inhabitants of these Colonies which are in comparatively
close proximity to millions and hundreds of millions of Asiatics that there shall not
be an influx of people alien in civilization, alien in religion, alien in customs, whose
influx, moreover, would most seriously interfere with the legitimate rights of the

existing labour population."12 Chamberlain cautioned, however, that overt dis
crimination could cause problems:
The United Kingdom owns as its brightest and greatest dependency that enormous
Empire of India, with 300,000,000 of subjects, who are as loyal to the Crown as you

are yourselves, and among them there are hundreds and thousands of men who are
every bit as civilized as we are ourselves, who are, if that is anything, better born in the

sense that they have older traditions and old families, who are men of wealth, men of

cultivation, men of distinguished valour, men who have brought whole armies and
placed them at the service of the Queen, and have in times of great difficulty and
trouble, such as for instance on the occasion of the India Mutiny, saved the empire by
their loyalty.13

To avoid giving offence, Chamberlain suggested, assertions of racial difference were
to be avoided: "It is not because a man is of a different colour from ourselves that

he is necessarily an undesirable immigrant, but it is because he is dirty, or is
immoral, or he is a pauper, or he has some other objection which can be defined
in an Act of Parliament, and by which the exclusion can be managed with regard to

all those whom you really desire to exclude." This, Chamberlain emphasized, had
been achieved in Natal, where they had adopted legislation that required Asian
immigrants to undergo a language exam. This legislation allowed an immigration
officer to impose a proficiency test in a European language on arriving South Asian
10. For details on Natal, see Jeremy Martens, "A transnational history of immigration restriction:
Natal and New South Wales, 1896-97," The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History, 34,
no. 3 (September 2006): 323-344; and chapter 5 in Marilyn Lake and Henry Reynolds, Drawing the
Global Colour Line: White Men's Countries and the Question of Racial Equality (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2008).

11. For a summary of these conferences, see Maurice Ollivier, ed. The Colonial and Imperial

Conferences from 1887 to 1937, vols. 1-3 (Ottawa: Queen's Printer, 1954).
12. Ollivier, The Colonial and Imperial Conferences, voi. 1, 139.
13. Ibid.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

632

International Journal 68(4)

immigrants, and it became a benchmark colour screen for British colonies, includ
ing Canada, acknowledged by public officials throughout the empire. Obscuring
racism while securing racist exclusions became a hallmark of the British Empire.
This case also highlights how the BC immigration bills (Natal Acts) were not
simply local outbursts of local nativism but rather part of an intricate and global
web of white supremacy in the settler colonies, coordinated through the Colonial
Office in London. Indeed, Joseph Chamberlain had communicated directly with
Canadian representatives on the need to emulate the Natal Act.14 Further research

has shown that the Natal Act was modelled on US "Jim Crow" legislation in
Mississippi. Prevented from disenfranchising African Americans because of the

14th and 15th Constitutional Amendments passed during the civil war, the
Mississippi Constitutional Convention passed a literacy test that could be used

to limit voting. British legal scholar and future ambassador to Washington
James Bryce (author of The American Commonwealth) transmitted this precedent
to British colonial officials in southern Africa and later reported that the Cape had
introduced a literacy test to limit African voting rights.15 From the American south

to Africa, from London to British Columbia, Britain's Colonial Office managed to
globalize white supremacy on an unprecedented scale.
Limiting Asian immigration had begun in 1885 with the imposition of a head tax
on Chinese migrants. This exacerbated gender issues, and Chinese women had little
opportunity to join their migrant husbands. By 1908, the federal government had
expanded the gendered and racist restrictions into a differential yet comprehensive
system for excluding Asians. Thus, for imperial Japan, a "Gentleman's Agreement"
was reached in 1908 limiting Japanese immigration. For South Asia, the government
used administrative orders-in-council (including the infamous Continuous Journey
Act) because of British fears that overtly racist prohibitions would fuel anti-British
agitation in India. And in the case of China, regarded as the "sick man of Asia," the
Canadian government employed blatantly discriminatory measures, including the
head tax and the eventual outright ban on Chinese immigration in 1923.
From the beginning, Asian Canadians fought these restrictions. In 1885, the
Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association was formed in Victoria to contest

the head tax. And in 1914, the Indo-Canadian communities in BC came together t
protest the government's refusal to allow the 376 Indian passengers on board th
Komagata Maru to disembark when the ship arrived in Vancouver. Among the
leaders of the support movement were Rahim Hussein and J.E. Bird, who set

important precedents in white-Asian solidarity. Neither is acknowledged i

Canadian history.
The measures to exclude Asians, and similar measures taken to exclude those o
African heritage, assured white domination. However, preventing Asian immigr
tion also reduced the pool for labour and for settlement. Canada opened its door
to eastern and southern Europeans, groups that hitherto had been considered
14. Geiger, Subverting Exclusion, e-book edition, position 2137.
15. Lake and Reynolds, Drawing the Global Colour Line, 71-72.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

633

Price

second-class whites. The golden age of immigration under the Liberals' Clifford
Sifton was predicated on Asian exclusion.

Twinning the empires
Australian historians Marilyn Lake and Henry Reynolds have posited that
"In Iraq, the United States, Britain and Australia fight together in a 'coalition of
the willing' that recapitulates the Anglo-Saxon solidarity of earlier times with
devastating consequences."16 The scope of its international alliances is extensive,
but at the core we find that the US empire remains wedded to a concept of the West
that has at its centre the historically constructed alliances rooted in the opaque but

deeply racialized notions of Anglo-Saxonism.
Canada declined to participate in the invasion of Iraq (a point I will return to
later). Yet its role historically in constructing the Anglo-American alliance was
significant and rooted in the politics of racism.

Immediately after the anti-Asian race riots in Vancouver in 1907, the Canadian

government found itself squeezed between London and Washington.17
In November, Rodolphe Lemieux, Canada's postmaster general and minister of
labour, crossed the Pacific to Tokyo in what was arguably Canada's first autono
mous foray into overseas diplomacy. Upon arrival in Tokyo, Lemieux first solicited

the support of the British ambassador, Sir Claude MacDonald, in negotiating
immigration restrictions. MacDonald, upon receiving instructions from London,
offered to back Lemieux for "all he was worth." However, Lemieux rebuffed an
appeal from the US ambassador to Japan, Thomas J. O'Brien, to join in the nego

tiations with Lemieux and MacDonald in Tokyo. O'Brien had been tasked by
President Theodore Roosevelt to negotiate similar emigration restrictions to the
US in the aftermath of the San Francisco school board crisis of 1906. Roosevelt,

infuriated by how events unfolded in Tokyo, summoned Mackenzie King, then
deputy minister of labour, to the White House in February 1908 where he told

King that Lemieux's "ostentatious refusal to have anything to do with the

American ambassador had done harm to the situation."18

This incident prompted Roosevelt to recruit King to work toward a hemispheric

agreement to exclude Asians. It also led him to send the US "Great White Fleet"
around the world with the particular goal of intimidating Japan. "The Japanese
must learn," Roosevelt believed, "that they will have to keep their people in their

own country."19 White Canada's common interest with the US in excluding
Japanese was but the beginning of Canada's role in welding together the old
empire and the new.
16. Ibid.

17. See Julie Gilmour, "Interpreting social disorder," International Journal, 67, no. 2 (Spr
483-495; see also John Price, "Orienting the empire," B.C. Studies 156 (Winter 2007/08
18. William Lyon Mackenzie King, "The Mackenzie King Diary," 25 January 1908. Note: al
ences to King's diary are accessible at http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/databases/kin
e.html (accessed 13 September 2013).
19. King, "The Mackenzie King Diary," 25 January 1908.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

634

International Journal 68(4)

The Canadian government worked assiduously with the British and American
governments to police South Asian immigration.20 This collaboration began with
Ottawa hiring a former British Indian policeman, William Hopkinson, to spy on
South Asian communities on both sides of the border.21 Faced with systemic dis
crimination in both Canada and the US, activists quickly drew the connections
between white supremacy on the Pacific coast and British control of India, culmi

nating in the founding of the revolutionary Ghadar Party in 1913. British,
Canadian, and US agencies worked collaboratively to both restrict immigration
from India and harass the anti-colonial activities of the Ghadar movement.22 Upon

joining the British and Canadians in the First World War, the US government
cracked down on South Asian activists and their sympathizers and, working closely
with the British, tried 14 Indian activists and their supporters for their attempts to

promote uprisings in India against British control in what became known as the
"Hindu Conspiracy" trial.23 The emerging British-American global collaboration
prompted anti-colonial activists Taraknath Das and Sailendra Ghose to conclude
that their struggle was not just against British rule in India but against "Anglo
Saxon" imperialism, putting a name to the new alliance.24 Canada also supported
US and British efforts to veto Japan's proposed racial equality clause at Versailles.
Perhaps the most important example of Canada's commitment to facilitating
Anglo-American supremacy was its policy in the Pacific. On 15 February 1921, the
Canadian prime minister, Arthur Meighen, wrote to the British prime minister
arguing strenuously that further renewal of the Anglo-Japanese alliance, first estab

lished in 1902, risked alienating the United States government: "There is a danger
that a special confidential relationship concerning the [Pacific] region between our
selves and Japan to which she was not a party would come to be regarded as an
unfriendly exclusion and as a barrier to an English speaking concord." He con
cluded: "We should terminate the Alliance and endeavor at once to bring about a

Conference of Pacific Powers... for the purpose of adjusting Pacific and Far
Eastern questions." 25
A few months later, Meighen travelled to London for the imperial conference
(prime ministers' conference) of June-July 1921. He argued formidably for an end

to the alliance and the convening instead of the Washington Conference
20. This period is documented in chapter 2 of Reg Whitaker, Gregory S. Kealey, and Andrew
Parnaby, Secret Service: Political Policing in Canada from the Fenians to Fortress America
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2012).
21. For a concise and well-referenced biography of Hopkinson, see the Simon Fraser University
website Komagata Maru: Continuing the Journey, at http://komagatamarujourney.ca/node/14691

(accessed 10 September 2013).
22. Seema Sohi, "Race, surveillance, and Indian anticolonialism in the transnational Western U.S.
Canada Borderlands," The Journal of American History 98, no. 2 (September 2011): 420—436.
23. This crackdown is often referred to as the Hindu-German conspiracy because the German gov
ernment was helping to fund rebellion in India, a point not raised by Sohi in her study referenced

here.

24. Sohi, "Race, surveillance, and Indian anticolonialism," 436.
25. Governor General to Colonial Secretary, 15 February, 1921. Documents on Canadian External
Relations, Vol. 3, 1919-1925 (Ottawa: Department of External Affairs, 1970), 163.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

635

Price

in November. Historians differ on Meighen's personal impact, but there is no
denying that at the Washington Conference, the Anglo-Japanese alliance came
to an end, replaced by the four-power treaty (US, British Empire, Japan, and
France) in which Japan was rendered a junior partner to Anglo-American hegem
ony in the Pacific. This and further US and Canadian immigrations restrictions
against Japanese from 1923 to 1928 provided real grist for the propaganda mill and
fired the Japanese imperial imagination.

When first confronted with the Japanese invasion of China in 1937, Canada's
prime minister Mackenzie King mused, "The animal instincts are asserting them
selves, & are best left to work themselves out, & others to abstain therefrom. It is

an appaling [sic] world situation—but not worth the lives of white men for
'Business Interests.'"26 Appeasement began long before Munich, and racism was
a contributing factor. Such views prompted Hugh Keenleyside, a secretary in
Canada's Tokyo embassy at the time, to remark that the "inscrutability of the
Orient and the 'oriental mentality' were largely a fiction of lazy minds."27

By the 1930s, support for racial stereotyping was waning even among whites,
yet the institutional underpinnings of white supremacy remained unchanged.
This would create a dilemma for muscular coloniality in a time of crisis.

The paradoxes of change
The Japanese Canadian experience during the Second World War is important not
because it paints Canada in a negative light but rather because it highlights import

ant paradoxes in Canadian history. Canadian identity is often tied to being differ
ent from the United States—for example, we supposedly have a more benign past.
Yet the persecution of Japanese Canadians exceeded Washington's ill treatment of
Japanese Americans. In Canada, not only were all Japanese Canadians uprooted
from their homes but their property and worldly goods were seized and sold off.
Such a seizure did not occur in the US. Japanese Canadians were not allowed to

join the armed forces; Japanese Americans were. Japanese Americans began
returning to their coastal communities beginning in early 1945, before the war
ended; the Canadian government tried to deport Japanese Canadians and, failing
that, prevented them from returning to the coast until 1949.

Yet in early 1942, the feminist Nellie McClung, who had moved to Victoria in
1935, wrote a feature piece in the Victoria Daily Times Magazine in which she
argued that the "Canadian Japanese are not to blame for the treacherous attack
on Pearl Harbor," and that it was a time to respect human rights and democracy.28

"We must have precautions, but not persecutions," she asserted. A number of
others also raised their voices against the uprooting of Japanese Canadians, but
to no avail. Herein lies a paradox of history.
26. King, "The Mackenzie King Diaries," 30 August 1937.
27. Hugh Keenleyside, Memoirs of Hugh Keenleyside, vol. 1, Hammer the Golden Day (Toronto:
McClelland and Stewart, 1981), 424-425.
28. Nellie McCIung, Victoria Daily Times Magazine, 10 January 1942, 7.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

636

International Journal 68(4)

The hegemony of the racist state was breaking down as ordinary people were
changing their views regarding Asian Canadians. Intermingling, Co-operative
Commonwealth Federation campaigns for the franchise, and other factors had
created a wellspring of empathy. Thus, when colonial masculinity tried to demonize

Japanese-Canadians in a time of crisis, as occurred in the male-dominated provin
cial legislature and Victoria City Council in early 1942, it met resistance. The result

was a vitriolic campaign against Japanese Canadians that silenced the opposition
and led to the cataclysmic uprooting described above.
Although Canada took longer than the US to end its attack on its Japanese citi
zens, as wartime fears dissipated and the brutality of the Nazis became apparent,
fewer people were willing to buy into the racisms of the past. Thus, Victoria City
Council's 1945 appeal to exile all Japanese Canadians to Japan after the war found
little support when sent to other municipalities. A few years after the war, the Chinese

Exclusion Act was repealed, and Asian Canadians gained the franchise. This rapid
volte-face could have occurred only because attitudes had already begun to change.

Reinventing the "West"
In post-war international affairs, global decolonization meant that overt racism
had to be contained. Winston Churchill's speech in Fulton, Missouri is famous for
its "iron curtain" reference, but history has forgotten his call at that time for a
continuing alliance of the "English-speaking peoples" under American leadership.
The Cold War and the politics of anti-communism reinvented and enlarged the
Anglo-American imperial quest in the name of the "West."
Through its support of NATO, NORAD, and its reluctant participation in the
Korean War, Canada's post-war Liberal government proved its worth as a US ally.

It became part of the core, of an Anglo-American bloc within an enlarged
alliance—Pax Americana. Yet the need to nurture a distinct Canadian identity
prompted the federal government to display some degree of autonomy, and
Ottawa often proclaimed its solidarity with newly independent states. This stance
was recognized by countries such as India and China when they nominated Canada
to serve on the International Control Commission for Vietnam at the Geneva con

ference initially in 1954. Canada's role here had the unintended consequence of
allowing the Canadian government to forego troop deployment to Asia in support
of the US war in Indochina. It laid the groundwork for Canadian peacekeeping and
strong support for the UN, values that many Canadians regarded as an integral part
of their identity. The massive demonstrations against the invasion of Iraq in Quebec
and the rest of Canada in 2003 reflected this tradition and created the space for the

Chrétien government to reject US appeals for Canadian participation in the inva
sion.29 Not surprisingly, peacekeeping and the UN quickly became the target of the

Conservative Party of Canada's muscular nationalism.

29. To be sure, the Liberal government supported US intervention in other ways, including military
involvement in Afghanistan, a move that became the thin edge of the wedge for the Conservatives
once they came to power.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

637

Price

Persistent lobbying on the part of Asian Canadians and their allies, including
Asian countries and newly independent countries of the Caribbean, finally put an
end to racist immigration preferences in 1967. However, by that time white Canada

was reproducing itself exponentially. Euro-Canadians increased by 6.5 million
between 1941 and 1961, those of Asian heritage by just 48,000.30 Over 1 million
European refugees came to Canada after the Second World War while Asian refu
gees continued to be excluded.31
Only now are we beginning to see the dramatic changes in demographics
brought about by immigration reform. This process accompanied but remained
quite distinct from the nationalism of Quebec's Quiet Revolution that gave birth to

multiculturalism in the 1970s and 1980s. Even 30 years after the introduction of
multiculturalism, and despite major demographic shifts apparent in large cities, the

legacies of white supremacy and colonialism continue to haunt Canada.
First Nations peoples experience this legacy daily, and their resistance often
strips away Canada's liberal veneer, revealing a deep-seated and virulent racism.
Nor has anti-Asian racism disappeared—consider the contortions the Bank of
Canada went through to justify not depicting an Asian woman on the new $100
bill, or the accusations by the head of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service
(CSIS) that Chinese-Canadian politicians were agents of the Chinese government.
The temporary foreign workers program adds another layer to a segmented job
market in which people of colour continue to be channelled into lower-paying
service jobs.
Eurocentrism continues to dominate our education system. As Luke Clossey of
Simon Fraser University and his colleagues recently demonstrated, 85 per cent of
historians at Canadian universities still teach Canadian, European, or American
history. The histories of 85 per cent of the world's population remain on the
periphery.32

Despite Canada's decision to opt out of the invasion of Iraq, continuing eco
nomic integration with the US assured Canadian participation in the US-led war
on terror. The treatment of Omar Khadr, the Canadian child soldier, is only the
latest example of Islamophobia that has accompanied this campaign and led to the
harassment of Arab/Muslim communities.
Five years ago in this journal, Henry Yu outlined the great potential that Pacific

Canada offered.33 A younger generation is prepared for change, but whether we
30. Statistics Canada, Table A125 163, Origins of the Population, Census Dates, 1871 to 1971, avail
able at http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/ll-516-x/sectiona/4l47436-eng.htm (accessed 16 September
2013).
31. On postwar European immigration from Europe, see Franca Iacovetta, Gatekeepers: Reshaping
Immigrant Lives in Cold War Canada (Toronto: Between the Lines Press, 2006); on refugees from

China, see Laura Madokoro, "'Slotting' Chinese families and refugees, 1947-1967," Canadian
Historical Review 93, no. 1, (March 2012): 25-56.
32. Luke Clossey, "The Wider World in the Peripheral Vision of Historians in Canada,"
ActiveHistory.ca, 19 June 2013, http://activehistory.ca/2013/06/the-wider-world-in-the
peripheral-vision-of-historians-in-canada/ (accessed 22 July 2013)
33. Henry Yu, "Global migrants and the new Pacific," International Journal 64, no. 4 (October 2009):
147-162.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

638

International Journal 68(4)

can move forward depends on whether we can shed a past in which whiteness
became the standard and everything and everyone was measured against it. The
histories of indigenous peoples, Asian Canadians, and their many allies are part of
a global process of decolonization that offers us valuable lessons—and opportu
nities to reshape our destiny.

Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public,
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Author Biography
John Price is a professor of history at the University of Victoria. He is the author of

Orienting Canada: Race, Empire and the Transpacific (UBC Press, 2011).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:24:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


