---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Beyond the "Ecological Indian": Environmental Politics and Traditional Ecological
Knowledge in Modern North America
Author(s): Gregory D. Smithers
Source: Environmental History, Vol. 20, No. 1 (January 2015), pp. 83-111
Published by: Oxford University Press on behalf of Forest History Society and American
Society for Environmental History
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24690695
Accessed: 16-07-2021 02:14 UTC

Beyond the "Ecological

Indian": Environmental
Politics and Traditional

Ecological Knowledge in
Modern North America
Abstract
The idea of the ecological Indian dates back to at least
the early modern period in Europe and initial colonial en
counters between Europeans and Native North Americans.
In the minds of Europeans, and later Euroamericans, the
ecological Indian represented a softly spoken "noble sav
age," a natural conservationist who was attuned to the
earth's rhythms. As the following essay reveals, this racial
trope remains alive and well in the modern history of North

America, inhibiting meaningful dialogue between white
Americans and Indigenous/First Nations people on environ
mental issues and the rapid pace of global warming.
Through case studies of the Campo Indian Reservation in
southern California, the Pine Ridge Reservation in South
Dakota, and Native American opposition to the construc
tion of oil pipelines through tribal lands, in addition to

©The Author 2015.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American

bociety Tor tnvironmentai History ana tne i-orest History bociety. am rignts reservea.

For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

Gregory D. Smithers, "Beyond the "Ecological Indian": Environmental Politics and
Traditional Ecological Knowledge in Modern North America," Environmental
History 20 (2015): 83-111
doi: 10.1093/envhis/emu125

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

84 I Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

analysis of the environmental writings of Indigenous schol
ars and activists such as Deborah McGregor and Winona
LaDuke, this essay aims to advance historical and environ
mental discourses beyond racial stereotypes. The article also

seeks to encourage a deeper, serious, and more meaningful
engagement with Native American environmental knowl
edge and social practices to more effectively meet the envi
ronmental challenges confronting Native and non-Native
peoples alike in twenty-first-century North America.

INTRODUCTION
According to Kimberly Tallbear (Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of South
Dakota), the so-called ecological Indian remains alive and well in
twenty-first-century America. Tallbear observes that white environ
mentalists routinely draw on racial stereotypes that depict Native
Americans as "soft-spoken" people who reject "the white man's laws
and practices" and remain loyal to "traditional" land and water use
patterns.1 In recent decades, the referencing of "authentic Indians"

and "uncontaminated" Indigenous knowledge has tended to mute

the voices of Native American people on issues of ecological sustain
ability and the rapidity with which climate warming is altering biota
and ecosystems.2
This essay aims to move beyond the racial stereotypes identified by
Tallbear. It does so by incorporating brief case studies of the Campo
Indian Reservation in southern California, the Pine Ridge Reservation
in South Dakota, and Native American opposition to the construction
of oil pipelines through tribal lands to illuminate how racial stereo

types about ecological Indians continues to hamper Indigenous ef

forts to exercise territorial sovereignty effectively and implement
environmental policies deemed to be in the best interests of Native
communities. The essay also analyzes the scholarship and activism of

two Anishinaabe women on opposite sides of the US-Canadian bor

der to reveal how traditional ecological knowledge (or TEK) can have

both local applications and transnational implications.3 Deborah

McGregor (Anishinaabe, Whitefish River First Nation in Ontario) and
Winona LaDuke (Anishinaabe of the White Earth Reservation in
Minnesota) have made significant contributions to scholarly and po

litical discussions about resource sustainability and ecological man
agement practices. Their intellectual work and activism has also

sought ways to foster economic self-sufficiency and sustainable agri
cultural practices, in addition to resisting the exploitative practices of
corporations engaged in oil, gas, and coal extraction on Native lands.

The work of McGregor and LaDuke highlights how TEK is a

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 85

transnational force that guides Native and First Nation spokespeople

in articulating approaches to resource management and ecological

sustainability.
Late twentieth- and early twenty-first-century Native American en
vironmental activism and knowledge systems are not born out of the

racial stereotypes associated with the ecological Indian. Instead,
Indigenous ecological knowledge is the product of an ecological
awareness that is historical, spiritual, and political in nature. This

awareness is dynamic in character, providing a framework for under
standing Native American insights into how to meet the challenges

of global environmental change in the twenty-first century.

Significantly, the writings of McGregor and LaDuke, and the experi

ences of Indigenous people at the Campo and Pine Ridge

Reservations, reveal how Native American ecological awareness inter
sects with the economics and politics of neocolonialism in modern

North America.

This ecological awareness is grounded by TEK. While Native schol
ars and activists have long striven to articulate and apply traditional
knowledge in their respective communities, it has only been since
the late 1980s that the broader scholarly community has begun to in
corporate TEK into environmental studies.4 For Indigenous scholars
and environmental activist like Deborah McGregor, TEK acquires its
contemporary meaning within the context of Indigenous cultural re
vival movements of the late twentieth century. McGregor notes that
these movements center on a cooperative ethos for resource manage
ment and conservation. TEK, as the following analysis reveals, is a
source for Native empowerment that allows communities to "re
claim traditional values and practices," undermine racial stereotypes
about ecological Indians, and elevate Indigenous voices in negotia
tions with Euroamerican governments—especially in the United
States and Canada—on issues such as resource management and envi
ronmental sustainability.5

DEFINING THE "ECOLOGICAL INDIAN"
The modern ecological Indian idea has its antecedents in the imagi
nations of Europeans and Euroamericans from the late fifteenth cen
tury. It was a product of a relational history in which Europeans and
Euroamerican traders, missionaries, and settlers believed their civili

zation was socially and culturally more advanced than the civiliza
tions nurtured by North America's Native peoples.6 By the eighteenth

and nineteenth centuries, Europeans and Euroamericans focused

their mythologizing on "noble" ecological Indians living in harmony
with nature as a way to highlight how Western civilizations had pro

duced spiritually broken people—societies of isolated individuals

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

86 I Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

Figure 1 : Theodore de Bry's engraving provides an early example of how Europeans perceived Native
American attention to the local ecology as critical to their agricultural cycles. Credit: Theodore de Bry,

Florida Indians Planting Seeds of Beans or Maize, 1591. Library of Congress Rare Book and Special
Collections Division, Washington, DC, LC-USZ62-31869.

who had become overly materialistic. In contrast, Europeans and
Euroamericans imagined Native Americans as transhistorical figures
possessing nurturing feminine qualities that allowed them to remain
connected to the rhythms of the natural environment, thereby an
choring an emotive spirituality thought to be long extinguished in

the white man's soul.

The cultural, economic, and political structures that people of
European descent brought to the New World—trade, Christianity,
centralized governments, technological inventiveness, and the devel
opment of capitalism—coexisted alongside the nurturing of romantic
images of the so-called ecological Indian and the noble savage living
on "vacant soyle."7 A long list of European intellectuals and writers
such as John Dryden, Thomas Southerne, Aphra Behn, Charles-Louis
Montesquieu, Garbielle Mably, Guillaume-Thomas Raynal, and Denis
Diderot, used the imagery of the "noble savage" to question the
morality of European colonialism in the New World.8 These writers
routinely emphasized the duality of masculine civilization and sim
ple-minded, yet effeminate, Indigenous societies, a binary that re

ceived its most forceful articulation in Rousseau's A Discourse on the

Origin of Inequality (1755) and his exploration of "savage man."9
Many fine works of scholarship explore how Euroamerican writer
musicians, and playwrights adapted Rousseau's conceptualization of

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 87

the "savage man" in the two centuries after the publication of his
Discourse.10 It is not my intention here to revisit the arguments
made by Rousseau scholars. Suffice it to say that Rousseau was not
writing specifically about Native Americans; however, Rousseau's

"savage man" ultimately provided European and Euroamerican

writers, playwrights, and songwriters with a ready language to craft

the imagery of the prototypical Native American—the "noble sav
age." From the earliest years of the American republic, we see the

transformation of Rousseau's "savage men" in, for example, the

story of Samson Occom (Mohegan). Occom was the most famous
eighteenth-century Native American to emerge in New England soci

ety. A convert to Christianity, he helped to spread Christianity

through his writings and his leadership of the Brothertown move
ment. But when missionaries first encountered Occom, he appeared
as the prototype of the ecological Indian and "noble savage." Occom
reportedly lived simply, resided in a wigwam—its materials being

"the simple Product of nature."11 Alternatively, the eighteenth

century literature, theater, and opera, such as Julia Kemble Hatton's
Tammany, A Serious Opera (1794), turned out cultural productions

that reified the ecological Indian and "noble savage" in American

culture.12

By the nineteenth century, the so-called noble savage had become
a fixture in American popular culture. Among the most influential lit
erary figures to craft narratives about noble savages in the American
wilderness were James Fenimore Cooper and Henry David Thoreau.13

Cooper and Thoreau typified the transcendental and sentimental

tenor of American literature during the antebellum era.
Transcendentalists, who believed that individuals possessed an "in
dwelling" God and should act on intuitive thought, wrote "sentimen
tal" prose that emphasized feeling over empirical logic. The American
Indian—in the form of either the "noble savage" or his literary exten
sion, the ecological Indian—were blessed with these emotional and
spiritual qualities, qualities that were routinely feminized. Henry

Wadsworth Longfellow's epic poem Hiawatha (1855) portrayed

Native Americans with the spiritual and emotional qualities that tran
scendentalists and romantic writers longed for. Longfellow's Indians
were thus men of action, equipped with the keenest of instincts.14 In
1857 Ralph Waldo Emerson lamented that the excesses of "civilized"

and "industrialized" American society had all but extinguished the
ideal of "primitivism." For Emerson, the Indian was passing from the
world's stage and would eventually become extinct. All the more rea
son, he felt, for white men to comprehend the Indian's knowledge of
the natural world, a knowledge that the "civilized" man had lost.15
"An Indian has his knowledge for use," Emerson wrote approvingly,
"and it only appears in use. Most white men that we know have theirs
for talking purposes."16

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

■as

'•

' vane i! i u re. .
~H i:

1E3+* "'frU;

Figure 2: Noël François Bertrand's picture represents America in allegorical terms, linking the imager
a "young Native maiden" to the idea of the American wilderness as a feminine space ripe for coloni
penetration and conquest. Credit: Noël François Bertrand, L'Amérique, ca. 1820. Library of Cong
Rare Book and Special Collections Division, Washington, DC, LCUSZ62-101601.

Racial stereotypes about "noble savages" and ecological Indians
possessing an emotional connection to the land while lacking any
understanding of Western-style property rights were deeply embed
ded in European and Euroamerican culture by the latter half of the
nineteenth century.17 From P. T. Barnum's "Congress of Nations" in
the 1850s, to vaudeville stereotypes, Buffalo Bill Cody's Wild West

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 89

!iWi

"3

ISr* W

laE^L

Figure 3: This photograph by Edward S. Curtis typified how early twentieth-century photographers
staged Photographs of Indigenous women to convey a sense of "nature" as feminine and to emphasize
the ecological Indian's innate understanding of nature's rhythms. Credit: Edward S. Curtis, Out of the

Forests' Depths Stepped an Indian Maiden, ca. 1905. Library of Congress Rare Book and Special
Collections Division, Washington, DC, LCUSZ62-130194.

Show, and the portrayal of Native Americans in motion pictures
and advertising, Indigenous people possessing keen instincts, laser

precision senses, and a simple-minded love of the land became

stitched into the fabric of America's racial culture during the twenti
eth century.18

The historical portrayal of ecological Indians and noble savages
were the subject of Shepard Krech's controversial book The Ecological

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

90 j Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

Indian (1999). Krech's analysis renewed both scholarly and popular

interest in the ecological Indian. His objective was to test the validity
of the mythology against what he considered to be the empirical real
ity of environmental history in North America. Krech interrogated
the idea of "the Indian in nature who understands the systemic con
sequences of his actions, feels deep sympathy with all living forms,
and takes steps to conserve so that the earth's harmonies are never

imbalanced and resources never in doubt."19 Krech thus began his

analysis with a romantically overdrawn, ahistorical image of an un
changing "Indian." From this starting point Krech developed the bi
nary ecological Indian, one good, or "noble," the other "ignoble," or

bad.20 He found no evidence to support the assertion that "the

American Indian is a nonpolluting ecologist, conservationist, and en
vironmentalist, and that the white man is not."21 Moreover, Krech

concluded that pre-Columbian Native Americans were unable to

maintain a sustainable balance between human society and nature.
Krech thus found no empirical evidence to support the idea that "the

Indian in nature" understood the "consequences of his actions" or

felt a "deep sympathy for all living forms."22

Since the publication of Krech's The Ecological Indian, scholars have
addressed both the content of his argument and reengaged with the
trope of the ecological Indian. This scholarship has often been punc
tuated with highly charged rhetoric.23 Darren Ranco, for example,
criticized Krech not only for his simplistic use of racial stereotypes,
criticism of Native cultures, and silence on issues like territorial sover
eignty, but for the way Krech's analysis is "grievously disengaged

from the contemporary issues of Indian communities."24 Ranco's

larger criticism of Krech's analysis is a valid one: Krech took the posi
tion of the "casual, and distant, critic." As Ranco suggests, this was
the type of position taken by ethnographers and anthropologists for
much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, a position that in
variably led non-Indigenous scholars to pass judgments on what was,
and was not, "authentic" Indian culture and behavior.25 Ranco thus

reminds us that the imagery associated with the ecological Indian
tends to be an overly contrived cultural construction that slides into
the realm of imposed racial stereotypes and reinforces a binary that
artificially distinguishes between the ecologically aware Indian and
the ecologically destructive Native.

Commenting on this binary, Melissa Nelson (Turtle Mountain
Band of Chippewa) observes that conceptualizing Native Americans
as "either simple, pure, and in tune with nature, or savage, selfish,
and harmful to the land" highlights a "conspicuous lack of under
standing of the diversity and humanness of Native Americans."26
Nelson offers more than simply a rebuttal of the stereotypes ascribed
to the ecological Indian; she draws our attention to the ways in which
TEK is "making significant contributions in a variety of scientific and

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 91

environmental fields." Nelson observes that Indigenous scientists
and educators have successfully woven TEK into the broader fabric of
ecological knowledge and public policy debates. Indigenous scientists
and educators like Gregory Cajete (Santa Clara Pueblo), Leroy Little
Bear (Blood Tribe of the Blackfoot Confederacy), and Winona LaDuke
have proven influential in this respect.27 Building on the insights of
these Native writers, Nelson is at pains to emphasize how the coman
agement of natural resources by Native and Western scientists has
influenced the application of TEK by nongovernmental organizations
in colonized environments from Australia to Alaska.28 Applying TEK
in a world in which technology continues to change how humans in
teract with the environment and in which racial stereotypes about

noble and ignoble ecological Indians persist remains a very real

challenge.29

hew recent cases empnasize tne complex interplay among science

and technology, TEK, tribal sovereignty, and racial perceptions than
the Campo Landfill case in southern California.30 At the beginning of
the 1990s, the Campo Band of Mission Indians declared their inten
tion to construct a solid waste landfill on their reservation, located
approximately one mile from the Mexican border. Campo leaders in
sisted that the landfill would be state of the art, an assurance designed
to assuage critics that the landfill would not contaminate a nearby

aquifer.31 The battle against the Campo landfill united farmers,

ranchers, and local environmental groups, most notably Backcountry
Against Dumps (BAD), organized by Donna Tisdale. This unlikely tri
umvirate produced some passionate pleas against the proposed land

fill, in addition to some stunningly vitriolic attacks on Campo

leaders. For example, Arol Wulf, a farmer and member of BAD, con
tended that the "Indians are trying to ruin our land." Wulf added, "a
dump is against what Indians have always stood for."32 Wulf was not
alone in expressing these views. Another farmer told a New York
Times reporter, "We are going to keep the land from being destroyed

by the Indians." Ralph Goff, the Campo tribal chairman, rejected
such statements. While Goff publicly acknowledged the financial

benefits of the landfill to the Campo people, he maintained that "it is
a sound project," and "environmentally it can be done safely." Goff's
supporters and lawyers agreed, criticizing environmental activists for
showing a lack of respect for Indian sovereignty and implying that
Native Americans were incapable of overseeing the construction of
an environmentally sound waste management system.33
After a drawn-out political and legal battle, the secretary of the in
terior agreed with Goff. Plans for the landfill's construction were ap
proved in 1993.34 What the debate over the landfill exposed was how
local white farmers, ranchers, and environmentalists insisted that
they knew what "authentic" Indians would do when presented with

the possibility of constructing a solid waste landfill on their

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

92 I Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

reservation. In his analysis of the Campo landfill controversy, Dan
McGovern wrote that the decisions Native peoples make about land
use practices sometimes contradicts the "conventional wisdom of
white Americans" who imagine Native Americans living in "harmony
with their environment."35 Opponents of the Campo landfill may
have been well intentioned, but their opposition to the Campo's deci
sion was predicated on the same uncritical use of Western stereotypes
that Krech also fell victim to in his analysis of the ecological Indian.36

By imagining "authentic" Indians living in a timeless past, Campo
landfill opponents constructed ignoble ecological Indians who

seemed willing to pollute the environment in return for substantial fi

nancial remuneration. In this way, these white opponents failed to
see beyond their own prejudices.

MOVING BEYOND THE "ECOLOGICAL INDIAN'

The controversy surrounding the Campo landfill is but one of ma
examples that highlights how the imagery of the ecological Ind
continues to inform public discourse about Native American and e

vironmental issues.37 A common feature of the trope of the ecolog
Indian remains the idea that authentic Indians live in harmony wi

nature and have an environmentally neutral impact on local ec

gies. In contrast, Native American people and communities that do
not behave according to prescribed racial stereotypes are too easily
dismissed as inauthentic and environmentally destructive, just as
critics upbraided the Campo Indians for approving the construction
of a landfill on their reservation. In other words, Indigenous "authen
ticity" remains a part of the colonial and racial matrix of US colonial
ism and contemporary environmental politics.38
Since World War II, the colonial and racial matrix has been concep
tualized in the public imagination by pop culture representations of
so-called real Indians. Movies have played a major role in this popular
imagining of authentic Indians, but so too has the Native tourist in

dustry contributed to a historical imagery.39 In Cherokee, North
Carolina, for example, the Oconaluftee Indian Village promises visi
tors a snapshot of "authentic" Cherokee life, just as it was eleven
thousand years ago. This living history attraction, located in the

Smoky Mountains, provides tourists with a view into one version of
Cherokee history before they get into their cars to spend a few hours

with nature in the nearby Great Smoky Mountains National Park.

Thus the visual and oral narratives that tourists encounter at the

Oconaluftee Indian Village overlap with what tourist brochures to
as the unspoiled beauty of the Smoky Mountains National Park.40
There is, however, a tension in all this, one born of the endurin

impact of US colonialism and of how Euroamerican perceptions

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian j 93

Ol'ONnUIFUE

LIVING/Me«* J

INDIAN VILLAGE J
Turn Right 1 TIL May^!H3cl 25
L

Figure 4: A sign in Cherokee, North Carolina, advertising Oconaluftee, a "Living Authentic Indian
Village." Photograph by the author.

"authentic" versus "assimilated" Indians, and the "natural" as op
posed to the "manmade" environment, continue to shape cultural

and historical perceptions. But these issues are not meant to crowd
the thoughts of tourists who leave these types of attractions and
return to their suburban homes with the storyline of Indians living
simple and ecologically aware lives intact.41
The traditional, authentic, and ecological Indian as a figure of con
sumer consumption and tourist entertainment contributes to how
white Americans frame political and economic questions about tribal
sovereignty, Indigenous economic self-sufficiency and agricultural
production, and political debates about environmental sustainability.
Melissa Nelson highlights these issues when she writes of how
American colonialism continues to have an impact on Native
American communities. She argues, "Ongoing cultural genocide per
sists every time Indians are denied religious freedom, federal recogni
tion, treaty rights, a 'seat at the table,' and other fundamental
rights."42 For Native American activists, such is the case with contem
porary political, legal, and economic issues related to tribal sover
eignty, agriculture, and environmental protections.
Thus enduring storylines associated with the ecological Indian
make it possible for twenty-first-century Americans to divert their
attention away from the socioeconomic and legal structures of

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

94 I Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

modern-day colonialism. This has become increasingly apparent to
Native American environmental activists. Since the passage of the
Indian Civil Rights Act in 1968 (an act that Indian activists note has
actually eroded tribal autonomy) and the end of the termination pol
icy, Native American environmental activism has done much to chal

lenge racial stereotypes and cultural clichés about Indigenous

peoples. Native environmental activists have therefore become vocal
and sophisticated in critiquing the federal government's Indian pol
icy. In particular, Native environmental activists have played an im
portant role in spotlighting the collusion between government and

corporations. In the contemporary neocolonial context, this collu

sion has involved governments working to make it possible for multi

national corporations to sidestep issues of tribal sovereignty and

extract natural resources from tribal lands. Federally backed subsidies
for major oil companies and legislative approval for hacking are just
two of myriad examples of how Native American environmental ac
tivists are able to connect the defense of tribal sovereignty with issues
of ecological sustainability.43
While Native American activists address these issues in relation to

their respective local communities, Indigenous activists and commu
nity leaders are not blind to the broader implications of the tribal sov

ereignty-environmentalism dynamic. For example, Gwich'in leade
Sarah James has written about the "very real threat" posed by globa

warming.44 James does not mince her words, emphasizing a basic

truth: "Too much waste and greed" has over the past century changed
the environment and warmed the earth's atmosphere. Her solution
rests on a simple principle: "We have to give up some things in order
to balance the environment. We must learn to share more, to reuse,
recycle, and use less energy."45 James lays no claim to possessing in
nate spiritual insights into the earth's ecologies. She is, however, con

scious that human behavior has changed the global environment,

thus necessitating modifications in that behavior.
In acknowledging the impact that human beings have on the envi
ronment, Native Americans have not lost sight of the spiritual impor

tance of land and water in Indigenous culture. Gail Small
(Cheyenne), for example, acknowledges that there "is a profound
spiritual dimension to our natural environment." This acknowledg
ment, however, should not be seen as acceptance of the ecological
Indian trope and of so-called authentic Native women doing things
the "old-fashioned way."46 Small is clear on this, stating, "Some

white people look to us for help in their struggle with loss of identity,
spirituality, and a sense of security. Unfortunately, we can't give that
to them. They need to find it within themselves and their own cul
tures. When they try to appropriate tribal cultures, they have a nega
tive impact on our culture and alienate themselves even more from
their own ability to be centered."47

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 95

These women defy stereotypes. They are not, as the ecological
Indian motif emphasizes, passive observers of social, political, and en
vironmental change, dutifully playing the role of the soft-spoken and
spiritual Indian. Instead, their words and activism highlight how is

sues of American neocolonialism, tribal sovereignty, and environ
mental change are intertwined in Native American political

consciousness. To borrow from Donna Barbie, these women chal

lenge Euroamericans to "give up satisfying legends" about Native
Americans and to start seeing (and negotiating with) Indigenous
Americans as real human beings.48 They are, in other words, active
political agents working to nurture families, communities, and
ecosystems.

At the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, local concerns

about these types of issues highlight how a generation of Oglala

Sioux people has worked to foster agricultural development, cultural
renewal, and a historical understanding of colonialism's ongoing leg
acy. Debra White Plume (Lakota), a writer and activist, and her hus
band, Alex White Plume (Lakota), have played leading roles in trying
to stimulate both the economy of the Pine Ridge Reservation and re
minding its residents of their Lakota traditions. One of the most mov

ing examples of this awareness of colonialism's enduring impact

came in 1991 when the White Plumes led efforts to return the re

mains of Zintkala Nuni, one of the few Indigenous survivors of the
Battle of Wounded Knee, to South Dakota from an unmarked grave
in California.49

The White Plumes have actively engaged with the ongoing legacy
of colonialism for several decades. Debra White Plume, for instance,
has used her Sacred Shawl Women's Society to support victims of do
mestic violence, a problem that Reservation life, itself a product of co
lonial policy and practice, exacerbates. She has also endeavored to

find solutions to the chronic levels of unemployment on the Pine
Ridge Reservation. "We have over 16,000 able-bodied people in the
workforce," White Plume has stated of the Pine Ridge Reservation,
"and we have less than 3,000 jobs."50
In July 1998, the Oglala Sioux Tribal Council voted on a plan that
members hoped would address the chronic levels of unemployment
at Pine Ridge. The Tribal Council agreed to support a proposal to
grow industrial hemp on its sovereign lands. Industrial hemp is
grown in over thirty countries including the United States. It also has
a history of cultivation in North America that includes its production
on George Washington's plantation and use by the Henry Ford Motor

Company to manufacture plastic for its automobiles.51 Industrial

hemp is a variety of Cannabis sativa L. Varieties of the plant with a tet

rahydrocannabinol (THC) ratio of greater than 1 percent are com

monly used to produce marijuana. Industrial hemp, by contrast, has
a THC ratio of less than 1 percent, usually around 0.3 percent. Put

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

96 ; Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

simply, industrial hemp has no hallucinogenic qualities. Armed with

this knowledge, and following the Tribal Council's decision, the
White Plume family planted their first hemp crop in 2000. By
November 2001, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and
armed FBI agents—one of whom held a submachine gun at the un

armed Alex White Plume's face—responded. Failing to draw a distinc

tion between industrial hemp and the cultivation of marijuana,

federal agents entered the Pine Ridge Reservation and destroyed the
hemp crop.52

The White Plume family viewed the cultivation of industrial
hemp as the Oglala Sioux Tribal Council did: as an environmentally
sustainable way to revive the reservation's economy. Previous to this
decision, the Oglala Sioux at Pine Ridge Reservation relied on federal
government subsidies, the growing of corn and barley, and the raising

of horses to eke out a modest standard of living. The decision to
cultivate industrial hemp aimed to address poverty and to remedy
unemployment. Despite those intentions, the DEA opposed the
cultivation of industrial hemp at Pine Ridge. It cited a 1968 federal
law that prohibits the cultivation of cannabis-related crops, crops
assumed to have hallucinogenic qualities.53 While most experts
reject the idea that industrial hemp has mind-altering properties,
the larger issues that this case exposed relate to how tribal sover
eignty was attacked because the Oglala Sioux exercised its political
authority in a way that ran counter to the federal government's
vision for agricultural production on Indian reservations. Put another
way, federal officials appeared to believe that the Oglala Sioux were
acting in ways that ran counter to stereotypes about how ecological
Indians should behave. Tribal Council responded to the DEA's
intrusion to its sovereignty by pointing to the hypocrisy of federal
Dolicv54

As was the case in the Campo landfill controversy in California, the

events at Pine Ridge were by no means isolated examples of

Indigenous sovereignty being questioned or undermined during the
late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. During the first decade
and a half of the twenty-first century, the proposed construction of

the Keystone XL Pipeline has constituted the most significant chal
lenge to tribal land and water resources, and tribal sovereignty. The
proposed pipeline aims to connect the Alberta tar sands to refineries
in the Gulf of Mexico. The White Plumes reject the idea that the pipe
line will help to secure energy independence for the United States
and instead see the potential for catastrophic pollution of tribal lands
and further encroachments on tribal sovereignty. They have therefore
led opposition to the construction of the Keystone XL Pipeline and

the transportation of tar sands oil by truck through tribal lands.

Feeling pressure from voters who demand cheaper gasoline and heat
ing oil, federal and state politicians have seized on the Keystone XL

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian i 97

Pipeline debate as a means of galvanizing support from their respec
tive political bases. In April 2012, for example, Republican Party presi
dential hopeful Mitt Romney declared his determination to construct
the Keystone XL Pipeline. In contrast to the Obama administration,

which initially rejected a proposal by TransCanada to build the

1,700-mile pipeline, Romney insisted that the pipeline would become

a reality if he was elected president, "even if I have to build it
myself."55

Romney's comments came just months before the Canadian-Based
oil giant Enbridge Inc. was forced to pay a fine of $3.7 million for a
2010 malfunction in its pipeline, a catastrophic failure that resulted
in 20,000 barrels of crude oil being spilled into the Kalamazoo River
system in Michigan.56 For Native American environmental activists,
the fine was a pyrrhic victory. In protests that looked strikingly simi

lar to those directed against the construction of the Keystone XL
Pipeline, tribal groups such as the Minnesota Chippewa petitioned

against the construction of Enbridge's pipeline.57 To the detriment of
the wetlands, river systems, and ecosystems that Native Americans
shared (and continue to share) with whites in Minnesota, Wisconsin,
and Michigan, the pipeline was built despite tribal leaders, farmers,
and environmentalists forewarning of potential environmental

disaster.

At ri ne Ridge, protests over the proposed construction ot the

Keystone XL Pipeline and the use of trucks to transport tar sands oil
through tribal lands mirror activism directed against the Enbridge

pipeline. These protests have resulted in arrests. In March 2012,

Debra and Alex White Plume led a blockade against trucks attempting

to transport tar sands oil through the Pine Ridge Reservation.

Debra White Plume insisted that drivers tried to sneak the trucks

through Lakota lands without a permit from the Tribal Council.
For her efforts, White Plume was arrested. After being released from

jail she issued a statement, saying, "We stood our ground for our

land, our treaty rights, our human rights to clean drinking water and

our coming generations. We did this in solidarity with the First
Nations people in Canada who are being killed by the tar sands oil
mine, which is so big it can be seen from outer space; it is as big as
the state of Florida."58 Debra White Plume did not invoke the
trope of the ecological Indian to justify her actions to halt the
transportation of tar sands oil and equipment needed to construct
the Keystone XL Pipeline through Lakota land. Instead, White
Plume's opposition was based on a determined effort to resist the
excesses of corporate colonialism in twenty-first-century America, a
form of neocolonialism that not only seeks quietly to undermine
tribal sovereignty, but to engage in practices that risk polluting the
land and water systems that the Lakota rely on for economic, politi
cal, and spiritual life.59

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

98 I Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

'TRADITIONAL" KNOWLEDGE IN THE

'MODERN" WORLD

The interconnectedness of tribal sovereignty, sustainable agricult
and ecological responsibility that the White Plumes have emphasi
throughout their lives has also defined Indigenous environmenta
tivism since the 1970s. At a local, national, and international level,
Indigenous women have been particularly effective in articulating
statements on climate change and identifying potential solutions.

For example, the Rural and Indigenous Women's Statement on

Climate Change, which included Indigenous signatories from around
the world, identified how "free market chauvinism facilitated by the

World Trade Organization and international and regional financial

institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank, and the Asian Development Bank, have led to the relentless ex
ploitation and exhaustion of natural resources, destruction of forest
and water sources in developing countries resulting in more carbon
emissions." Such impacts, which have had particularly negative con

sequences for "marginalized rural and indigenous communities,"
have been the focus of Indigenous women's written submissions to
the United Nations.60 To address the environmental challenges iden
tified in such statements, Native activists, political leaders, and writ
ers insist on the important role that women can play. For instance,
The Manukan Declaration of the Indigenous Women's Biodiversity
Network declares that "Indigenous women have a vital role to play in
the protection and conservation of the biodiversity in distinct ecosys
tems including forests, arid and semi-arid lands, inland waters,
oceans and coasts and mountains."61

Such statements reflect the active ways in which Indigenous
women have tackled the complex issues associated with rapid global
climate change.62 Two Anishinaabe women, Deborah McGregor and
Winona LaDuke (who uses the plural of Anishinaabe, "Anishinabeg,"
in her writings), have been among the most articulate voices in set

ting out the positions of Indigenous women in local, national, and

international debates about environmental change.63 McGregor, for
example, is clear in her position that the "Uncritical belief in Western
science and technology as the only valid approach to resolving envi
ronmental problems has fallen by the wayside." In making her case
for the efficacy of Native knowledge, McGregor insists, "Science and
technology, at least on their own, cannot get us out of the situation
we are now in."64

McGregor has acknowledged that Native environmental knowl
edge, often referred to as TEK, is itself a construct of Western intellec

tual discourses. Concepts like environmental and ecological

constitute reductionist terms of analysis common in Western scien
tific thought. As McGregor points out, Native people often perceive

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 99

the separation of human beings and environment into discrete con

ceptual categories as anathema to "the rest of everyday living."65

Thus McGregor notes that TEK does not constitute a homogeneous

body of thought; rather it is a fragmented body of knowledge
"derived from the framework of the dominant society."66
That said, two important themes run through McGregor's writings.
First, she views TEK as a critical component of Indigenous cultural re

vivals over the past half century, and second, she emphasizes how
Native women are playing an active role in counteracting the ways in

which neocolonial cultures devalue Indigenous knowledge for "sus
taining Creation." Like Gregory Cajete, McGregor sees opportunities
for Native environmental knowledge and Western science and tech
nology to act together in meeting the challenges posed by global en

vironmental change.67 McGregor makes this broader point by

stating, "What is required is a different way of thinking, a paradigm
shift from that of Aboriginal people as objects to be studied to that of
Aboriginals as real people."68
Such a shift in thinking will certainly challenge received forms of

historical thinking, especially the types of historical imagery de

ployed by Krech in his analysis of the ecological Indian and the often
hostile reactions of whites to Native Americans exercising their sover
eignty, as was the case at the Campo and Pine Ridge Reservations, re
spectively.69 McGregor's analysis of water protection has showcased

how she envisions Native knowledge contributing to ecological sus
tainability. McGregor observes that most Indigenous cultures include
narratives about the importance of water to the creation and sustain
ing of life. Underscoring Anishinaabe knowledge about the impor
tance of water to human life, McGregor writes eloquently about the
Anishinaabe women who began walking around the Great Lakes in
the early 2000s to raise awareness about the spiritual importance of

water. This walk was inspired by Anishinaabe elder Josephine

Mandamin and became known as the Mother Earth Water Walk. In

addition to this type of consciousness raising activity, McGregor

highlights how the Anishinabek Nation, an Indigenous organization

that brings Native women's voices together, created the Women's

Water Commission, a body that has had a significant impact on envi
ronmental policy around Ontario's Great Lakes region. The women's

activism and political engagement that McGregor has brought to
scholarly attention underscores the importance of water in Native
American environmental politics. To reinforce this point, McGregor
quotes Edward Benton-Banai's (Ojibwe) observation that "the Earth is
said to be a woman. In this way it is understood that woman preceded

man on the Earth. She is called Mother Earth because from her come

all living things. Water is her lifeblood. It flows through her, nour
ishes her, and purifies her."70 Water, like fire, is both a life-giving and

cleansing force in Anishinaabe tradition, as it is in other Indigenous

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

100 | Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

cultures. Moreover, McGregor posits that the special connection that
Indigenous women have with water inheres in them a wisdom that
should receive serious consideration when governments consult with
local communities on issues of "water management."71

The active engagement of Indigenous women in environmental

conservation and sustainability has constituted the life work of an

other Anishinaabe woman, Winona LaDuke. Since speaking before

the United Nations at the age of eighteen, Winona LaDuke has been

one of the most prominent, influential, and insightful Native

American activist writers on issues related to environmental sustain

ability, neocolonialism and tribal sovereignty, and women's health
and well-being. Born in Los Angeles in 1959, LaDuke grew up in
California and Oregon before receiving her college education at
Harvard University. She is an enrolled member of the Mississipp
Band of the Anishinabeg. She has served as the director of Honor th
Earth and as the campaign director for the White Earth Land
Recovery Project. Outside of Native America, LaDuke is best known
for being Ralph Nader's running mate on the 1996 and 2000 Green
Party presidential ticket.72

LaDuke has made her voice heard on environmental and tribal sover

eignty issues in many different arenas. She speaks regularly on college
campuses, has challenged the inertia that often defines mainstream
American political responses to environmental challenges, and has writ
ten eloquently in both fiction and nonfiction formats.73 Her language
and writing is readily accessible to both academic and general audiences,
and her insights are often quite profound. One scholar, in comparing

her writing to that of Shepherd Krech, argues that if Krech is an

"iconoclast," then LaDuke is "more of a romantic."74
Like Native American activist writers who have come before her,
such as political scientist Vine Deloria (Standing Rock Sioux), LaDuke
is engaged in a decolonization project that aims to reclaim Native
lands and communities from what she sees as the neocolonial

American state.75 LaDuke has attempted to engage the struct
neocolonialism in the United States with language that is both
arly and a call for action. She has urged increased ecological aw

claiming, "Our bodies are a mirror of our mother, and of

Earth," and she has directly addressed the reality of global war
"Somewhere between the teachings of Western science and th
the Native community," LaDuke has written, "there is some ag
about the state of the world. Ecosystems are collapsing, species
ing extinct, the polar icecaps are melting, the ozone layer is wi
and nuclear radiation has contaminated the land."77

LaDuke sees a clear connection between Indigenous cultur
tions and the political and economic issues that have con
Native Americans in the late twentieth and early twenty-

centuries. "It's difficult to separate 'cultural' from other proj

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian ! 101

LaDuke contends, "because they are so integrated."78 LaDuke is thus

a proponent of pressing Native American political agendas at all
levels of society—from the political to the everyday. She has also

expressed a belief in the importance of asserting Indigenous perspec
tives into the "mainstream" political agenda.79 But if there is one fac
tor that has enabled LaDuke to distinguish her thinking on the

environment and issues of tribal sovereignty it is that Indigenous
women have an active role to play.80 To facilitate this engagement,
LaDuke has actively promoted the Indigenous Women's Network, a
grassroots collaborative that champions issues of major concern to

Native women.

LauuKe nas given tnese organizational activities tneir intellectual

thrust through her writings and speeches. For over two decades, she
has connected cultural, political, and environmental activism with
her interpretations of traditional Indigenous spirituality and the im
portance of seasonal changes to Native understandings of the world.
LaDuke maintains that such connections are not only important to

Native American environmental activism, but are critical for women

to make. "As a woman," LaDuke argues, "I think it makes sense for
me to worry about whether my great-grandchildren can live here and

whether indigenous communities can survive." She adds that envi

ronmental awareness and activism is as much a woman's issue as it is

an Indigenous concern: "I also think the mainstream women's move

ment should be more concerned about the environment. That's a

women's issue. Take breast cancer, for example. Women should b

rioting. Instead, the disease gets overly personalized and all of the

toxic dumping and environmental destruction that cause it get
nored."81 The cultural and intellectual starting point from whic

LaDuke has urged greater ecological awareness is rooted in her unde
standing of traditional Indigenous knowledge systems. She explains
that "Traditional ecological knowledge is the culturally and spiri

ally based way in which indigenous peoples relate to their ecosy

tems. This knowledge is founded on spiritual-cultural instructions
from 'time immemorial' and on generations of careful observation

within an ecosystem of continuous residence. I believe that thi

knowledge represents the clearest empirically based system for re
source management and ecosystem protection in North America."82
LaDuke's emphasis on the importance of traditional knowledge, em
pirical observations, and an awareness of "natural law" has remained
a consistent thread in the way she addresses the relationship between
human behavior and the environment. "The key to a sustainable soc

ety," she argues, "is accountability to natural law. Indigenous, o

land-based societies (wherever they are found in the world or in hi
tory), understand that all life is accountable to natural law. Laws
made by nations, states, provinces, cities, etc., are inferior to this
supreme law."83

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

102 | Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

But how do Indigenous environmental activists define natural law?
LaDuke defines it in reference to the cyclical nature of the seasons—

of birth, death, and rebirth—in Native American philosophies.
Natural law, LaDuke contends, is "An alternative interpretation of
the world. . . [that involves] 'continuous rebirth.' This is how we tra
ditionally understand the world and how indigenous societies have
come to live with natural law." Importantly, LaDuke's understanding
of Indigenous traditions is not that of static, unchanging cultures; in
stead, Native knowledge systems are dynamic, innovative, and adapt
able. As LaDuke explains, "Two tenets are essential to this paradigm
[of continuous rebirth]: cyclical thinking and reciprocal relations and
responsibilities to the Earth and creation."84

Adapting traditional Indigenous philosophies about the environ

ment to the modern world also magnify the significance of reciproc

ity in debates about ecological sustainability. In Western cultures,
reciprocity is overshadowed by the principles of competition, the ac

cumulation of wealth, and economic possessiveness. In contrast,

Indigenous concepts of reciprocity in North America view nonhuman
and human ecosystems as interconnected. Whether human or
nonhuman, this worldview considers all life-forms as animate. And

governing all of this, LaDuke explains, is an ethos: "You take only
what you need, and you leave the rest."85

LaDuke has made these arguments in a systematic and sustained

way in numerous books. In Recovering the Sacred (2005), she presents a
series of case studies that demonstrate how the history of colonialism
continues to have an impact on Native Americans. She observes that
examples of academic bullying, corporate greed, the "jackhammer of
industrial society," and the "binge of neocolonial expansion" that
has gone on in recent coal mining and oil drilling operations all high
light how the concerns of American Indians are so often dismissed or
simply treated with contempt.86 In lobbying to retain access to land
and water resources on tribal lands, LaDuke points out that universi

ties, corporations, and governments all too often dismiss Native
American viewpoints on the grounds that they are not authentic
Indian perspectives, or because the profit-driven activities of corpo
rate America prioritize economic growth as the critical component of
national security ahead of environmental sustainability and respect
for the sovereignty of Indigenous nations.

CONCLUSION

Winona LaDuke's activism and writing continues to focus on en
ronmental justice for tribal nations in the United States. Like th

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 103

White Plumes, she opposes the erosion of tribal sovereignty so that
oil pipelines can cut through Indian Country or so trucks can trans
port dirty tar sands oil through Indian reservations without permits
from Tribal Councils.87 And like Deborah McGregor, LaDuke encour
ages Native peoples to connect with their traditions and to apply les

sons millennia in the making to foster sustainable agricultural

practices and the management of ecosystems in the twenty-first cen

tury. Such an approach involves local action that promises to have
transnational consequences.88
The recent history of the Campo in California, the Oglala-Sioux at

Pine Ridge, and the insightfulness of Indigenous women like

Deborah McGregor and Winona LaDuke provide a broad framework
for moving beyond the stereotypes associated with the ecological
Indians and beginning to recognize that concepts such as ecology,
environment, and sustainability are historically specific, culturally
constructed, and yet intimately intertwined. Concepts like ecology,
environment, and sustainability have lived meanings, and it is
through specific human consciousness and cognition that these con
cepts receive validation and meaning. How an individual, or group of
individuals, see the ecology of a particular place and how they narrate
its value both shapes and is shaped by the dynamic nature of belief
systems. This dynamism is particularly pronounced in Indigenous so
cieties with traditions of oral storytelling, a narrative form that is the
basis for human behaviors and a traditionally grounded, yet simulta
neously modern, socially relevant, and meaningful, understanding of
the nature-human balance.

I make these points not to reiterate the ahistorical mythologies as
sociated with the "noble savage" and ecological Indian; instead I offer
them as a reminder that the ecological knowledge accumulated in
Native American communities is over two millennia in the making.
This knowledge may well offer all Americans solutions to the envi
ronmental destructiveness wrought across North America by over
four centuries of colonialism and offer insights into how to address
the realities of global environmental changes in the twenty-first cen
tury. We would all be well served to shelve the stereotypes associated

with the ecological Indian and instead heed the lessons of First
Nations environmental groups such as the Women's Water
Commission of the Anishinabek Nation, incorporate the ideas of
Native Women like Debra White Plume, Deborah McGregor, and
Winona LaDuke into local, national, and international discussions
about rapid global climate change, and to engage in a meaningful di

alogue with Indigenous communities and families living with un
precedented extremes in weather and dramatic modifications in
ecosystems throughout North America.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

104 | Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

Gregory D. Smithers is associate professor of history at Virginia
Commonwealth University in Richmond, Virginia. He is the author of nu

merous works including the forthcoming book The Cherokee Diaspora
(2015).

Notes

I would like to thank the anonymous readers for their superb feedback on earli
drafts of this article. Thanks also to Patrick Wolfe, Brooke Newman, and the edit
of Environmental History, Lisa Brady, for their invaluable suggestions.

1 Kimberly Tallbear, "Racialising Tribal Identity and the Implications for Politic

and Cultural Development" (paper presented at the Indigenous Peoples and

Racism Conference, Sydney, Australia, February 20-22, 2001, 4).
2 V. F. Cardova, "Ecoindian: A Response to J. Baird Callicott," Ayaangwaamizin: T
International Journal of Indigenous Philosophy 1, no. 1 (Spring 1997): 31; Nichola

James Reo and Kyle Powys Whyte, "Hunting and Morality as Elements of

Traditional Ecological Knowledge," Human Ecology 40 (2012): 15.
3 Emilie S. Cameron, "Securing Indigenous Politics: A Critique of the Vulnerabilit

and Adaptation to the Human Dimensions of Climate Change," Global
Environmental Change 22 (2012): 103-14.
4 In some quarters, the incorporation of TEK into the broader corpus of humani
ties, social scientific, and scientific work on the environment continues to be dis
missed, as Jose M. V. Fragoso and Nicholas J. Reo discovered in the course of
filing a grant application with the US National Science Foundation in the early

2000s. See Jose M. V. Fragoso and Nicholas J. Reo, "Complex Interactions be

tween Biota, Landscapes, and Native Peoples," Ecological Processes 2 (2013): 28.

5 Deborah McGregor, "Indigenous Knowledge in Canada: Shifting Paradigms and
the Influence of First Nations Advocates," Proceedings of the 1999 Sustainable
Forest Management Network Conference, 14-17 February, 1999, ed. Terrence S.
Veeman, Daniel W. Smith, Brett G. Purdy, Fiona J. Salkie, and Gillian A. Larkin
(Edmonton: Sustainable Forest Management Network, 1999), 193, 195. See also
Robert F,. Johannes, "Traditional Ecological Knowledge: A Collection of Essays—
Introduction," in Traditional Ecological Knowledge: A Collection of Essays, ed.
Robert E. Johannes (Cambridge: IUCN Publication Services, 1989), 6; Marie
Battiste, "Enabling the Autumn Seed: Towards a Decolonized Approach to
Aboriginal Knowledge, Language, and Education," Canadian Journal of Native
Education 22, no. 1 (1998): 16-27; Fragoso and Reo, "Complex Interactions be
tween Biota, Landscapes, and Native Peoples," 28; Winona LaDuke, "Traditional
Ecological Knowledge and Environmental Futures," in The Winona LaDuke
Reader, ed. Winona LaDuke (Stillwater: Voyageur Press, 2002), 78; Charles R.
Menzies and Caroline Butler, "Understanding Ecological Knowledge," in
Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Natural Resource Management, ed. Charles R.

Menzies (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2006), 1-2; Paul C. Rosier,
'"Modern America Desperately Needs to Listen': The Emerging Indian in an Age
of Environmental Crisis," The Journal of American History 100, no. 3 (December
2013): 711-735.

6 Roy Harvey Pearce, Savagism and Civilization: A Study of the Indian and the
American Mind (1953; repr., Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), 99;
Robert F. Berkhofer, The White Man's Indian: Images of the American Indian from

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 105

Columbus to the Present (New York: Vintage, 1978), 110; Bernard Sheehan,
Savagism and Civility: Indians and Englishmen in Colonial Virginia (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1980), 3; William Cronon, Changes in the Land:
Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England (New York: Hill and Wang,
1983), 4-5; Anthony Pagden, European Encounters with the New World: From
Renaissance to Romanticism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), 166-68;
Karen Ordahl Kupperman, Indians and English: Facing Off in Early America (Ithaca:

Cornell University Press, 2000), 20. Historian Joyce Chaplin observes that
sixteenth-century English theorists hypothesized that Native Americans were in
fact migrants to North America, thereby posing questions about their nativity

and claim to the land and waterways of the New World. See Joyce Chaplin,
Subject Matter: Technology, the Body, and Science on the Anglo-American Frontier,

1500-1676 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001), 178.
Minister John Cotton famously wrote that the Native Americans lived on "a va

cant soyle." See Cronon, Changes in the Land, 56. See also Timothy Dwight,
Travels in New-England and New-York, vol. 2 (London: William Baynes and Son,

and Ogle, Duncan, and Co. Paternoster Row, 1823), 493-94; Louis S. Warren,
"The Nature of Conquest: Indians, Americans, and Environmental History," in A
Companion to American Indian History, ed. Philip J. Deloria and Neal Salisbury
(Oxford: Blackwell, 2002), 287-306.
Deborah P. Fisk, ed., Tl:e Cambridge Companion to English Restoration Theatre
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 280; Joanna Lipking, "'Others,'
Slaves, and Colonists in Oroonoko," The Cambridge Companion to Aphra Behn, ed.
Derek Hughes and Janet Todd (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004),
179; Darren J. Ranco, "The Ecological Indian and the Politics of Representation,"
in Native Americans and the Environment: Perspectives on the Ecological Indian, ed.

Michael E. Harkin and David Rich Lewis (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
2007), 32-51.
Terry J. Ellingson, The Myth of the Noble Savage (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2001), 81-82.

See, for example, Gaile McGregor, Noble Savage in the New World Garden: Notes
Toward a Syntactics of Place (Bowling Green: Bowling Green State University
Press, 1988); Stelio Cro, The Noble Savage: Allegory of Freedom (Waterloo: Wilfred

Laurier University Press, 1990), x. See also Gregory Evans Dowd, "Wag the
Imperial Dog: Indians and Overseas Empires in North America, 1650-1776," in
Companion to American Indian History, ed. Deloria and Salisbury, 46-67.

William DeLoss Love, Samson Occom and the Christian Indians of New England
(Boston: The Pilgrim Press, 1899), 46, 92. On the Brothertown movement, see
David J. Silverman, Red Brethren: The Brothertown and Stockbridge Indians and the
Problem of Race in Early America (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2010); Linford
D. Fisher, The Indian Great Awakening: Religion and the Shaping of Native Cultures
in Early America (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).
Pearce, Savagism and Civilization, 172.
McGregor, Noble Savage in the New World Garden, 120.
Pearce, Savagism and Civilization, 192.

Pearce, Savagism and Civilization, 147; David A. Gerstner, Manly Arts: Masculinity
and Nation in Early American Cinema (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), 26.

Ronald A. Bosco and Joel Myerson, eds., Tlte Later Lechires of Ralph Waldo
Emerson, 1843-1871, vol. 2, 1855-1971 (Athens: University of Georgia Press,
2001), 58. See also Pearce, Savagism and Civilization, 147. See also p. 120; Greg
Garrard, Ecocriticism: The New Critical Idiom (New York & London: Routledge,
2004), 120.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

106 | Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

17 Such ideas helped to rationalize Native American dispossession in the early

nineteenth century and embed what Mark Rifkin calls "settler common sense"
in American popular and political culture. Mark Rifkin, Settler Common Sense:
Queerness and Everyday Colonialism in the American Renaissance (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2014), xvi.
18 Cronon, Changes in the Land, 61-62; Philip B. Kunhardt and Peter W. Kunhardt,
P. T. Bamum: America's Greatest Showman (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995),

176-78; L. G. Moses, Wild West Shows and the Images of American Indians,
1883-1933 (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1996), 3-6; Louis S.

Warren, Buffalo Bill's America (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2005), 195; Peter C.
Rollin and John E. O'Connor, eds., Hollywood's Indian: The Portrayal of the Native
American in Film (expanded ed., Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 2003);

Edward Buscombe, Injuns! Native Americans in the Movies (London: Reakton

Books, 2006). See also Philip J. Deloria, Playing Indian (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1998).

19 Shepard Krech 111, The Ecological Indian: Myth and History (New York: W.W.
Norton, 1999), 22.
20 Krech, The Ecological Indian, 16.
21 Ibid., 22.
22 Ibid., 21, 204-5.

23 A sampling of the reviews that touch on the politicized nature of Native
American history over the past generation include Colin Calloway, "The
Ecological Indian: Myth and History," Natural History 108, no. 8 (October 1999):

64; Andrew Gulliford's review in Environmental History 5, no. 3 (July 2000):
415-16; Roger L. Nicols's review in Montana: The Magazine of Western History 51,

no. 1 (Spring 2001): 79; Ray Miles's review in Louisiana History 42, no. 4
(Autumn 2001): 488-90; Dan Flores's review in Journal of American History 88,
no. 1 (June 2001): 177-78; Finis Dunaway, "Gas Masks, Pogo, and the Ecological

Indian: Earth Day and the Visual Politics of American Environmentalism,"
American Quarterly 60, no. 1 (2008): 92; Annette Kolodny, "Rethinking the
'Ecological Indian': A Penobscot Precursor," Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature

and Environment 14, no. 1 (Winter 2007): 1-23; Joseph Nicolar, The Life and
Traditions of the Red Man, ed. Annette Kolodny (Durham: Duke University Press,

2007), 102, 108, 203. See especially the debate among Baird Callicott,
"Indigenous Worlds or the Indigenous World: A Reply to My 'Indigenous'
Critics," Environmental Ethics 22 (2000): 291-310; Lee Hester, Dennis
McPherson, Annie Booth, and Jim Cheney, "Indigenous Worlds and Callicott's

Land Ethic," Environmental Ethics 22 (Fall 2000):273-90; and Cardova,
"Ecoindian: A Response toj. Baird Callicott," 31-44.
24 Ranco, "The Ecological Indian," 35.
25 Ibid., 35-36.

26 Melissa Nelson, "Ravens, Storms, and the Ecological Indian at the National
Museum of the American Indian," Wicazo Sa Review 21, no. 2 (Autumn 2006): 50.

27 Cajete has written extensively on issues of science, education, and ecology. See
Gregory Cajete, Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education
(Durango: Kivaki Press, 1994); Ignite the Sparkle: An Indigenous Science Education
Curriculum Model (Durango: Kivaki Press, 1999); Native Science: Natural Laws of

Interdependence (Santa Fe: Clear Light Publishers, 2000); Spirit of the Game:
Indigenous Wellsprings (Durango: Kivaki Press, 2004). See also Cajete's edited vol
ume A People's Ecology: Explorations in Sustainable Living (Santa Fe: Clear Light
Publishing, 1999). Leroy Little Bear's thinking has been particularly influential
in the field of Aboriginal land rights and sovereignty. See Leroy Little Bear,

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian | 107

Menno Boldt, and J. Anthony Long, Pathways to Self-Determination: Canadian
Indians and the Canadian State (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984);
Leroy Little Bear, Tite Relationship of Aboriginal People to the Land and the
Aboriginal Perspective on Aboriginal Title (Ottawa: Royal Commission on
Aboriginal Peoples, 1994); Naturalizing Indigenous Knowledge: Synthesis Paper
(Saskatoon: Canadian Council on Learning, 2009). See also Menno Boldt, J.
Anthony Long, with Leroy Little Bear, The Quest for Justice: Aboriginal Peoples attd
Aboriginal Rights (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985).

Nelson, "Ravens, Storms, and the Ecological Indian," 52-53. See also Tallbear,
"Racialising Tribal Identity," 5-6.
Gregory Cajete observes that the dramatic impact that science and technology
has had on the earth has Native American thinkers, like scientists and intellec

tuals from other racial and ethnic groups, "exploring alternative cosmologies,
paradigms, and philosophies in search of models that may sustain nature rather
than destroy it." See Cajete, Native Science, 211.
Cameron, "Securing Indigenous Politics, 104.

Robert Reinhold, "Indians and Neighbors Are at Odds over Proposed
Reservation Dump," New York Times, January 8,1990.
The Spokesman Review, January 17, 1990, A5.

Reinhold, "Indians and Neighbors Are at Odds." See also Dan McGovern, The
Campo Indian Landfill War: The Fight for Gold in California's Garbage (Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1995), 18, 25, 46, 151-52; Rebecca Tsosie, "Tribal
Environmental Policy and National Development Priorities," in War and Border
Crossings: Ethics When Cultures Clash, ed. Peter A. French and Jason A. Short
(Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2005), 277-78. On the issue of Native sover
eignty, the federal appellate court for the District of Columbia invalidated the

Environmental Protection Agency's decision to treat Native tribes as states

when issuing rules for solid waste programs. See Sarah Krakoff, "Tribal
Sovereignty and Environmental Justice," in Justice and Natural Resources:
Concepts, Strategies, and Applications, ed. Kathryn Mutz, Gary Bryner, Douglas
Kenney (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2002), 176.
The Prescott Courier, April 30, 1993, 4B; McGovern, The Campo Indian Landfill
War, 196-97.
Dan McGovern, The Campo Indian Landfill War, 89.

Scholars of environmental justice observe that corporations often seek out
Native American reservations for waste management facilities because they tend
to be free from federal and state environmental regulations. On this point see
Luke W. Cole and Sheila R. Foster, From the Ground Up: Environmental Racism and

the Rise of the Environmental Justice Movement (New York: New York University

Press, 2001), 138. The official website of the Campo Kumeyaay Nation rejects
such claims, insisting that the landfill is protected by "stringent regulatory over

sight." See Campo Kumeyaay Nation: Campo Landfill, accessed September 24,
2014, www.campo-nsn.gov/campolandfill.html.
Angelika Sauer, "The Wattle and the Maple in the Garden of the Empire," in
Shaping Nations: Constitutionalism and Society in Australia and Canada, ed. Linda
Cardinal and David Headon (Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, 2002), 125-26;
Russell McGregor, Imagined Destinies: Aboriginal Australians and the Doomed Race

Theory, 1880-1939 (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1997); Warwick
Anderson, Tlte Cultivation of Whiteness: Science, Health, and Racial Destiny in
Australia (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), 80; Patrick Brantlinger, Dark
Vanishings: Discourse on the Extinction of Primitive Races, 1800-1930 (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 2003), 6.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

108 | Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

38 Eva Marie Garroutte, Real Indians: Identity and the Survival of Native America
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003).
39 Vine Deloria, Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto (Norman: University
of Oklahoma Press, 1969), 1; Christina T. Beard-Moose, Public Indians, Private
Cherokees: Tourism and Tradition on Tribal Ground (Tuscaloosa: University of
Alabama Press, 2009), 33-34.

40 Alfred Runte, National Parks: The American Experience, 4th ed. (Lanham:

Rowman & Littlefield, 2010), 106.
41 Garroutte, Real Indians, 78; Bonita Lawrence, "Real" Indians and Others: Mixed
Blood Urban Native Peoples and Indigenous Nationhood (Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press, 2004), 3.
42 Nelson, "Ravens, Storms, and the Ecological Indian," 47.

43 On the environmental impact of hacking, see Investigation of Ground Water
Contamination near Pavillion, Wyoming (Office of Research and Development,
2011).

44 Sarah James maintains a website designed to empower "Women through
Outdoor Role Models," accessed August 2, 2012, http://www.mihoaida.com/
2010/07/01/sarah-james/.
45 Quoted in Wilma Mankiller, Every Day Is a Good Day: Reflections by Contemporary
Indigenous Women (Goldon, Colo.: Fulcrum Publishing, 2004), 107.

46 Gary P. Nabhan, Enduring Seeds: Native American Agriadture and Wild Plant
Conservation (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1989), xxvi-xxvii; Erik
Trump, '"The Idea of Help': White Women Reformers and the
Commercialization of Native American Women's Art," in Selling the Indian:
Commercializing and Appropriating American Indian Cultures, ed. Carter Jones
Meyer and Diana Royer (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2001), 176.
47 Mankiller, Every Day Is a Good Day, 35.

48 Donna Barbie, "Sacagawea: The Making of a Myth," in Sifters: Native American
Women's Lives, ed. Theda Perdue (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 62.
On this point see also Wilma Mankiller (and Michael Mallis), Mankiller: A Chief
of Her People (New York: Macmillan, 2000), 211.
49 Renee S. Flood, Lost Bird of Wounded Knee: Spirit of the Lakota (Jackson: Da Capo
Press, 1998), 301-3.

50 Lori Murphy, "Enough Rope: Why the United States v. White Plume Was
Wrong on Hemp and Treaty Rights, and What it Could Cost the Federal
Government," American Indian Law Review 35, no. 2 (2010-2011): 769. Recent
data from a Colorado State University study confirm White Plumes' assertions.

"The Reservation," "Red Cloud Indian School," accessed August 28, 2012,
http://www.redcloudschool.org/page.aspx?pid=432.

51 Winona LaDuke, "The Case for Hemp," Indian Country Today, September
19, 2001; repr., LaDuke Reader, 244; John Ferling, The Ascent of George
Washington: The Hidden Political Genius of an American Icon (New York:
Bloomsbury Press, 2009), 57; Martin A. Lee, Smoke Signals: A Social History
of Marijuana—Medical, Recreational and Scientific (New York: Scribner, 2012),
16, 195.

52 Murphy, "Enough Rope," 768.
53 Ellese Clay High, "Drawing Back the Buckskin Curtain," Wicazo Sa Review 10,
no. 1 (Spring 1994): 72; Robin Lash, "Industrial Hemp: The Crop for the
Seventh Generation," American Indian Law Review 27, no. 1 (2002-2003):
313-56; Christine A. Kolosov, "Evaluating the Public Interest: Regulation of
Industrial Hemp under the Controlled Substances Act," UCLA Law Review 57,
no. 237 (2009): 237-74.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian ; 109

The Oglala Sioux Tribe rejected this position. See Steve Smith, "Hemp for
Sovereignty: Scale, Territory and the Struggle for Native American Sovereignty,"
Space and Polity 12, no. 2 (August 2008): 234.

Eyder Peralta, "Obama Administration Rejects Keystone Pipeline Proposal,"
National Public Radio, January 18, 2012, accessed January 20, 2012, http://
www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2012/01/18/145397402/reports-obama-will
reject-keystone-pipeline-proposal; "Romney Would Build Keystone Pipeline If

Named President," ICTMN, April 21, 2012, accessed August 11, 2012, http://
indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2012/04/21/romney-would-build-key
stone-xl-pipeline-if-named-president-109476.
"Record Fine Proposed for Enbridge for 2010 Michigan Oil Spill," ICTMN, July

3, 2012, accessed August 11, 2012, http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.
com/2012/07/03/record-fine-proposed-for-enbridge-for-2010-michigan-oil-spill
121935. (Link no longer accessible at time of printing.)
John Myers, "Minnesota Tribes Fight Enbridge Oil Pipeline," ICTMN (originally
printed in the Dulnth News Tribune), July 8, 2009, accessed November 8, 2011,
http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/ictarchives/2009/07/08/minne
sota-tribes-fight-enbridge-oil-pipeline-83644. (Link no longer accessible at time
of printing.)

Brenda Norrell, "Five Lakotas Arrested at Blockade of Tarsands Megaloads," The
Narcosphere, March 6, 2012, accessed March 10, 2012, http://narcosphere.narco
news.com/notebook/brenda-norrell/2012/03/five-lakotas-arrested-blockade-tar

sands-megaloads.

Vincent Schilling, "Pine Ridge Residents Halt Canadian Equipment
Transportation Through Reservation," ICTMN, March 9, 2010, accessed March
10, 2012, http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2012/03/09/pine-ridge
residents-halt-canadian-mine-equipment-transportation-through-reservation
102246. Debra White Plume, "A Thread in the Beautiful Fabric of Resistance,"
Lakota Country Times, January 25, 2012, CI.

Rural and Indigenous Women's Statement on Climate Change: A Submission to
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
November 8, 2009. Similar statements that Indigenous women have played piv

otal roles in crafting include The Mandaluyong Declaration of Indigenous
Women and the Water Declaration of the Anishinabek, Mushkegowuk, and

Onkwehonwe.

The Manukan Declaration of the Indigenous Women's Biodiversity Network
(IWBN), Manukan, Sabah, Malaysia, February 4-5, 2004.
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Seventh Sessions, 3rd and 4th
Meetings, Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, HR/4946.
Because there are no standardized spellings of Anishinabemowin, the Anishinaabe

language, spellings vary: "Anishinaabe," "Anishnawbe," and "Nishnawbe."
LaDuke tends to use "Anishinabeg" to denote a collective sense of peoplehood.
Bonita Lawrence, Fractiired Homeland: Federal Recognition and Algonquin Identity in
Ontario (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2012), n. 3, 303. See also

Wendy Makoons Geniusz, Our Knowledge Is Not Primitive: Decolonizing Botanical
Anishinaabe Teachings (Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 2009).

Deborah McGregor, "Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Sustainable
Development: Towards Coexistence," in In the Way of Development: Indigenous
Peoples, Life Projects, and Globalization, ed. Mario Blaser, Harvey A. Feit, and
Glenn McRae (London: Zed Books, 2004), 72.
Deborah McGregor, "The State of Traditional Ecological Knowledge in Canada:
A Critique of Current Theory and Practice," in Expressions in Canadian Native

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

110 [ Environmental History 20 (January 2015)

Studies, ed. Ron F. Laliberte, Priscilla Settee, James B. Waldram, Rob Innes,
Brenda Macdougall, Lesley McBain, and F. Laurie Barron (Saskatoon: University
of Saskatchewan Extension Press, 2000), 442^3.
66 McGregor, "The State of Traditional Ecological Knowledge," 439, 448, 452.

67 Deborah McGregor, "Anishinaabe-Kwe, Traditional Knowledge, and Water
Protection," Canadian Woman Stndies/Les Cahiers de la Femme 26, nos. 3 and 4
(2008): 26.

68 McGregor, "Indigenous Knowledge in Canada," 196. Similar analysis has
been offered by Kyle Powys Whyte, "Indigenous Women, Climate Change
Impacts, and Collective Action," Hypatia 29, no. 3 (Summer 2014): 599-616,
esp. 604-9.
69 McGregor, "The State of Traditional Ecological Knowledge," 439; McGregor,
"Linking Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Western Science: Aboriginal
Perspectives from the 2000 State of the Lakes Ecosystem Conference," Canadian
Journal of Native Studies 28, no. 1 (2008): 139-58.

70 McGregor, "Traditional Knowledge: Considerations for Protecting Water in
Ontario," The International Indigenous Policy Journal 3, no. 3 (2012): 3.

71 McGregor, "Anishinaabe-Kwe," 29-30; McGregor, "Traditional Knowledge 3-4.
McGregor has also written about sustainability more broadly. See her
"Indigenous Knowledge in Sustainable Forest Management: Community-Based
Approaches Achieve Greater Success," The Forestry Chronicle 78, no. 6 (2002):
833-36; McGregor, "Honouring our Relations: An Anishinaabe Perspective on
Environmental Justice," in Speaking for Ourselves: Constructions of Environmental

Justice in Canada, ed. J. Agyeman, R. Haluza-Delay, C. Peter, and P. O'Riley
(Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2009), 27-41.

72 Sonya Paul and Robert Perkinson, "Winona LaDuke," in No Middle Ground:
Women and Radical Protest, ed. Kathleen M. Blee (New York: NYU Press, 1998),
51; John Mongillo and Bibi Booth, eds. Environmental Activists (Westport:
Greenwood Press, 2001), 157-59.

73 Winona LaDuke, "On Becoming One of Tucson's Banned Authors," ICTMN,
January 30, 2012, accessed March 1, 2012, http://indiancountrytodaymedianet
work.com/ict_sbc/on-becoming-one-of-tucsons-banned-authors.
74 Lee Schweninger, Listening to the Land: Native American Literary Responses
(Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2008), 37; Carolyn Merchant, American
Environmental History: An Introduction (New York: Columbia University Press,
2007), 21.
75 Ranco, "The Ecological Indian and the Politics of Representation," 39.

76 See Winona LaDuke's foreword in Rachel Stein, ed., New Perspectives on
Environmental Justice: Gender, Sexuality, and Activism (New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press, 2004), xiii.
77 Winona LaDuke, All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and Life (Cambridge:

South End Press, 1998), 197. See also LaDuke's "Foreword," in Thomas Peacock
and Marlene Wisuri, Ojibwe Waasa Inaabidaa: We Look in all Directions (Afton:
Afton Historical Society Press, 2002), 11. See similarly, Ward Churchill and

Winona LaDuke, "Native America: The Political Economy of Radioactive

Colonialism," Critical Sociology 13, no. 3 (April 1986): 51-78.
78 Paul and Perkinson, "Winona LaDuke," 58.
79 Ibid., 56.
80 Ibid., 56.
81 Ibid., 55.

82 Winona LaDuke, "Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Environmental
Futures," Colorado Journal of International Law & Policy 5, no. 127 (1994); repr.,

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beyond the Ecological Indian ! 111

LaDuke, LaDuke Reader, 78. See also Winona LaDuke, "Indigenous
Environmental Perspectives: A North American Primer," Akwe:kon Journal 9, no.
2 (Summer 1992): 52-71.

83 Winona LaDuke, "A Society Based on Conquest Cannot be Sustained: Native

Peoples and the Environmental Crisis," Toxic Struggles: The Theory and Practice of
Environmental Justice, ed. Richard Hofrichter (Salt Lake City: University of Utah
Press, 2002), 99.

84 LaDuke, "Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Environmental Futures," 79.
85 Ibid., 80. See also Winona LaDuke, "Environmental Work: An Indigenous
Perspective," Northeast Indian Quarterly 8, no. 4 (Winter 1991): 16-19; Winona
LaDuke, "An Indigenous View of North America," Journal of Family Life 4, no. 1

(1998): 35-39.
86 Winona LaDuke, Recovering the Sacred: The Power of Naming and Claiming
(Cambridge: South End Press, 2005), 19, 35.

87 Winona LaDuke, "Big Oil Wants to Truck through Nez Perce Land," ICTMN,
March 24, 2011, accessed March 24, 2011; http://indiancountrytodaymedianet
work.com/2011/03/24/big-oil-wants-to-tmck-through-nez-perce-land-23903.
(Link no longer accessible at time of printing.)

88 Rebecca Jacobs, "Winona LaDuke: Think Globally, Grow (and Eat) Locally,"
ICTMN, November 2, 2011, accessed November 2, 2011; http://indiancountry
todaymedianetwork.com/2011/ll/02/winona-laduke-think-globally-grow-and
eat-Iocally-59717.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:14:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


