---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
National Poetry Foundation

INDIAN TREATIES AND AMERICAN EXCEPTIONALISM: PROLEGOMENA TO A STUDY OF
AMERICAN IDEOLOGY
Author(s): JEROME McGANN
Source: Paideuma: Modern and Contemporary Poetry and Poetics, Vol. 44 (2017), pp. 147169
Published by: National Poetry Foundation
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/45171881
Accessed: 16-07-2021 02:22 UTC
INDIAN TREATIES AND AMERICAN
EXCEPTION ALI S M :

PROLEGOMENA TO A STUDY OF
AMERICAN IDEOLOGY
PREFATORY NOTE
Some 75 years ago Constance Rourke died with her great study The
Roots of American Culture (1942) unfinished. But her essential

method- what German philologists called Sachphilologie- was
already well known, and the essays in that last book left no doubt
about her argument: that "practical letters" as opposed to "polite lit-

erature" shaped "the earliest phases of our national life and" (she
went on to surmise) "perhaps for later phases [of the national history]
as well" (15, 11). Although her point of departure was Indian treatymaking in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the force of her
general view of the "practical" orientation of American literary and
cultural work was irresistible. This notable focus of both Early Amer-

ican Literature (whether Puritan or Enlightened, religious or secular) and its "Classic American" legacies, helps us remember why and

how political and social issues would continue to suffuse and often
bedevil "American Literature," even to the present.
This "Prolegomena" was written for a study of how to read the lit-

erary works that came out of the English-speaking American
colonies. The work will end with a discussion of Jefferson s Notes on
the State of Virginia and the correspondence that Adams and Jefferson carried on in the last ten years of their lives. But it might as well
have served an examination of America s literary history as narrowly
H7

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

148 Paideuma 44
conceived, that is, the corpus of "polite letters" that began in earnest
with Irving, Cooper, and Bryant. I have in mind to write that book as
well.

Traveling with Rourke s map opens up the American world to a
fresh view of its distinctive ways of "imagining" itself in the world. We

would perhaps be driven to rethink Marjorie Perloff s great essay
"Pound/Stevens: Whose Era?" (1982) and ask instead (or in addition),
for instance, "Reznikoff/Moore: Whose Era?" And we might be able

to see why any conception of the "American Renaissance" without
Poe and Dickinson won't do, and why Melville and the great writers

of Europe held Cooper in such honor, and why Martin Delany is as
important for our cultural memory as Frederick Douglass. Not many
recall that Douglass did not found The North Star by himself. But we
should.

i

Channeling Whitmans Democratic Vistas (1871), Richard Hofstadter observes that "It has been our fate as a nation not to have ideologies, but to be one." To the degree that this is the case, we would

have to call this "American Ideology" (Seymour Lipseťs phrase) an
Ideology of Enlightenment.1 It established itself in two great historical phases. The first came in and as the seventeenth-century Puritan
establishment, the second in and as that eighteenth-century line of
social and political thought that we call the Enlightenment. Sharply
different as they are from each other, each is riven from within with
conflicts and divisions: Roger Williams v. the General Court of Massachusetts, Anne Hutchinson v. John Winthrop, Congregationalist v.

Quaker, Covenant v. Half-Covenant; and then, later, Paine v. a host
of the Founding Fathers, Burr v. Hamilton, Adams v. Jefferson,
Henry Clay and Daniel Webster v. Andrew Jackson. Both of those
foundational imaginary sets- the Puritan and the secular Enlightenment-remain to this day living cultural forces perpetuating the con-

tradictions of that double-edged sword we call American
Exceptionalism. Most important, those respective habits of thought
and expression feed upon certain textual instruments that command
virtually absolute authority: in the first instance, the Bible; in the second, the American Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Remarkably,

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGanri / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 149

what began in North America as a struggle of religious commitments

found its fulfillment- by no means its completion- as a struggle of
secular ones.

Those contradictions have preoccupied everyone who studies
American history and culture and they are as well my subject here.

While I want eventually to map those contradictions through key
works of so-called "Classic American Literature ,"2 in this essay I
focus on the general pertinence of a particular and neglected set of
native American cultural events: Indian Treaties.3

In a context dominated by global, transnational, and postcolonial
studies- our current situation- such an approach might be reasonably judged dead on arrival. But I take it as an important and neglected truth what the poet observed, that there are "dead but sceptred
sovereigns who still rule / Our spirits from their urns" (Byron, Manfred). Or in Trotskys inspiriting recalculation of Byron s cautionary
reflection, that there is "a privilege of historical backwardness" (4).

The peace and friendship treaties- "clasped hands" and "linking
arms together" treaties- were dominating cultural events in the
colonial period of American history (Williams 53, 116).4 They are
important for understanding American history and culture exactly
because the Revolution consigned them to what the new nation
regarded as a superseded past.

American culture between about 1780 and 1900 is, with notable
exceptions, decidedly triumphal. In that spirit (critically framed as

Classic American, or elevated to an American Renaissance), it
brought forth a diverse body of imaginative prose and poetic reflections on American history and experience. In that corpus of work the

customary terms of "The American Creed" of Exceptionalism are for better and for worse, in sickness or in health- on full display:
"liberty, egalitarianism, individualism, populism, and laissez-faire"
(Lipset 19). The historical conditions that promoted those values
were Puritanism (the Puritan congregational government), the New
World frontier, and- finally- the American Enlightenment (institu-

tions of a Republican democracy).
From the outset, America's Enlightenment imagination, both in
its Puritan and its Republican forms, committed itself to a story that
locates the national history in the orbit of Western ideas and Euro-

pean colonial adventure. About 50 years ago Dale Van Every 's four-

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

15° Paideuma 44
volume account oí The Frontier People of America (1754-1845) laid
out a finished narrative version of this mythic tale. The volume Forth
to the Wilderness (1961) is particularly eloquent. It gives an account

of colonial North America from the end of the Seven Years War
(1763) through a series of brutal Indian conflicts to the end of Dunmore s War (1774) and the onset of the American Revolution. In his

foreword, the distinguished historian Ray Billington sees Every s
work as a story "superbly" told, "distilling the essence from history

... to reveal the broad sweep of human progress" (ix).
The tale begins with the establishment in 1763 of George Ills
Proclamation Line, which set the chain of the Appalachian Mountains as the western limit of white colonial expansion in America. It
recounts the relentless pressure by colonists up and down that line to
break across and begin the occupation of Indian territories to the further west. It ends with what Every calls "The Great Crossing" (chapter XX), when Daniel Boone breached the line, entering what is now
Kentucky to found Boonesborough. A company of forty settlers soon
followed, "arriving at Boonesborough," Every knowingly writes, "the
day after Concord and Lexington" (1:348).

This is how Every describes the Proclamation Line:
On the one side was a civilized, politically and economically advanced community of industrious white men counseled by leaders of an intellectual
capacity capable of identifying the lightning or composing a Declaration of

Independence and on the other was a trackless, primordial wilderness
infested by scattered tribes of irresponsible belligerent savages. (1:16)

That is a lucid distillation of American history as it was broadly
understood from the time of the earliest colonies until the 1960s.
Although academic scholarship over the past five decades has complicated the story, it still dominates popular culture and contemporary politics. It feeds upon ideas, attitudes, and expressions that are as

commonplace in colonial New England and New York as in the first
Virginia settlements. This ideology would metastasize across the
continent as the land was progressively appropriated and settled,
forming and augmenting in the process a deeply meaningful corpus

of American social and cultural memory and dream. Jefferson s
"Empire of Liberty" and Whitman s "New World," like the Protes-

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGann / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 151
tant Reformation and its child, the Puritan "errand into the wilderness" (Perry Miller), simply made course corrections to a history that
remained firmly Greco-Roman and Judeao-Christian.
II

Robert Frosts poem "The Gift Outright" was written out of that ide-

ological nexus. The poem, Frost said, was "a history of the United
States in a dozen lines of blank verse" ( Collected Prose 150). His fac-

tual mismemory of the poem- it has sixteen lines- makes an interesting connection to the truncated history of the United States that
the poem offers. In Frosts projection, "a history of the United States"

only includes the Colonial Period as an explicitly rejected historyUnAmerican, so to say, and not part of what the United States
"would become." "The Gift Outright" almost forgets, but not quite,

the complex colonial histories that set the terms for "such as [the
United States] would become" (348).
The poem s own composition history shows how texts often expose

certain matters of importance that they might have taken up but
chose not to. The received last line- "such as she would become" was originally written (during the 1930s Depression) "such as she
might become." Later, when President Kennedy asked Frost to read
the poem at his inauguration, he also asked if Frost might change
that last line to "such as she will become." Frost said he would.5 The
difficult weather on Inauguration Day thwarted that decision, however. In the end Frost managed to recite only the first few lines of the
poem. We will never know which final line he might have spoken.

In Frosts nuanced argument, "we" Americans only become "possessed by" "the Land" when we make it a "deed of gift" of our lives
in war. Frost is playing with a memory of the gifted land deeds native

Americans made to English settlers during the colonial seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. One of the earliest of these was the 1621
cession of Marthas Vineyard- Capawock was its Native name- to
the Plymouth settlers, and our popular history records many more,

some of them- like the land gifts William Penn told us he
received- legendary events in American history.6 These deeds of gift

would be scrupulously recorded by their colonial authors in many
written and printed documents. But those early native gifts, Frost

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

i52 Paideuma 44
suggests, would only get sealed when European immigrants to Amer-

ica fought and died to take the land from the British Empire. The
poem imagines these "many deeds of war" as beginning with the
American Revolution and then continuing the country s Manifest
Destiny to possess as much of the northern continent as possible
("vaguely realizing westward"). Frosts poem explicitly does not
remember the prehistory of the Revolution and its many colonial
"deeds of war."
Unpacking the poem s argument in this way, we may glimpse the
tares growing in its field of waving grain. Frosts America is a memory

whose focus on the Revolution has erased the nearly 200 years of
colonial events that led up to it. That earlier period also saw "many
deeds of war." Among the most consequential were the conflicts that
caught up the colonists and the indigenes: the Powhatan Wars (1610-

1646), the Pequot War (1637), King Philip's War (1675-1676), Bacon's
Rebellion (1676), King William's War (1689-1697), the Tuscarora
War (1711-1715), the Yamasee War (1715-1717), King George's War
(1744-1748), the Seven Years War (1756-1763), the Anglo-Cherokee
War (1758-1761), Pontiacs Rebellion (1763-1764), Lord Dunmore's
War (1774), the Sullivan Expedition (1779). At the heart of all these
military actions were struggles over land that one party wanted to
acquire and control and the other wanted to keep or recover.
Because the natives and the invaders were possessed by entirely different ideas about land and their relation to it, however, the wars also
involved a fundamental conflict of civilizations.
Although the invaders won all the wars and the natives lost nearly
all their land, that ethnic conflict has not ended. If Native American
tribal culture today is widespread and diverse, as it is, its civilities, like
those of all non-white "Americans," remain systematically suborned.

But that dismal subject isn't my subject. Rather, I want to suggest
why the documentary record of the colonial period, where many
deeds of war are set forth and glossed by the participants, must be

radically reconceived and reread. For accompanying those colonial
deeds of war at every point were a succession of treaties and deeds of
peacemaking that equally engaged the conflicted parties. But a seri-

ous discourse problem makes a clear view of that codependent history difficult to achieve. While the surviving deeds and associated

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGanri / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 153

commentaries are textual and Western, the treaty events that they
document were in great measure oral and aboriginal.7
When Indian gifts of land were translated into Western (textual)
deeds of gift, native people came to recognize that a "pen and ink
witchcraft" was often - indeed, nearly always- involved.8 Native gift-

ing, as we shall see, could and did mutate into something else
entirely when its social rituals- public, oral, and face to face- got
textually represented in written deeds and treaties. This happened
because there was a mismatch between what the natives and the
immigrants understood when gifts were exchanged and treaties
about land were made. The difference in media reflects a profound
difference in social habitus.

When Stuart Banner comments that "the concept of a land sale
did not exist in North America before the English arrived," he identifies that crucial difference. Unlike the English who "had been buy-

ing and selling land for centuries" (Banner 58), Native Americans
did not own land, they lived in relation to it. As Canasatego put it in

a famous speech to the Middle Colonists at a treaty convention in
Philadelphia in 1742, his people, his ancestors, and their children all
"came out of the ground," which was, he added, "everlasting" (Boyd,
ed. 51).
Canasatego was describing the ethos of what we call a subsistence

economy. The People were part of a land that all creatures, not just
human creatures, used and, in using, sustained. For native peoples,
the land was more than a complex ecosystem, it was an existential
absolute. To adapt a figure from abstract Western philosophy, it was
Being in the cyclic Time of eternal return.

In that frame of reference, when we read in the colonial documentary records about Indians "selling" lands that they "own," the
language is entirely white and Western. Indians could not sell what
they did not own. That is why William Cronon, discussing seventeenth-century land deals between natives and settlers, observes that

they "had more to do with sovereignty than ownership" (66). The
Powhatan Wars in Virginia erupted exactly because Powhatan
insisted that he, not the English colony or the Crown, was- to adopt
that Western legal term- sovereign of the lands the English wanted

to settle.9 Only after three bloody wars- really, one long and

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

154 Paideuma 44
renewed conflict (1610-1646)- would the English be able to settle, at
least to their own satisfaction, their claim of sovereignty. They con-

quered and destroyed the Powhatan Confederacy.
Three years earlier, in 1646, the Wampanoag sachem Massasoit
delivered one of the earliest and most celebrated declarations of the
native view that their land was not alienable property. "What is this
you call property? It cannot be the earth. For the land is our Mother
. . . the woods, the streams, everything on it belongs to everybody and

is for the use of all."10 Like nearly every Indian spokesman who
would come after him, Massasoit did not recognize the concept of
sovereignty at all. For Massasoit, the land itself was sovereign source.
in

For quite a long time we have known that so-called "Classic American Literature" is haunted, and that the haunting of our cultural
works has scarcely ceased to this day. "What exactly was haunting
antebellum America?" John Modern recently asked once again
(284). Everyone cites the scandal of slavery- "America s original
sin"- as at least one of the "unseen somethings haunting the day"
(7), and not a few have recognized a demon driving the wars to seize
the lands of Native Americans and destroy their civilizations (1610-

1890). Largely focused on later, less primal nightmares, John Modern argued that they all reflect a philosophical ground he calls "the

secular imaginary" (289). "More than an ideology" (282)- by which
he means more than a constellation of related ideas- "the secular
imaginary" is a quasi-religious faith,
a moral force, a connective tissue, a widely shared and massively intricate set
of epistemological assumptions. And like anything in excess of ideology, secularism defies logic, particularly its own. Consequently, it may be well-nigh
impossible to measure the powers of this normalizing process in which the
truly religious and the truly secular emerge as compatible, if not wholly continuous. (282-83)

"What is haunting America" is, briefly, what popular culture has
called the American Dream, so darkly addressed yet again by TaNehisi Coates in Between the World and Me. The nightmares that

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGarin / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 155

mutate from this dream are true historical realities- for instance, the
history of violence in America- that get repeatedly translated, trans-

formed, and recycled. Thomas Pynchon imagined them as the
Thanatoids of Vineland. George Romero made them famous in a
series of films about "the Living Dead."

For Modern, "a language of ghostly possession" (xxix) underpins
both Puritan and Enlightenment discourse. We are One Nation,
under God, but God is now a "secular imaginary" pervading the
exponents of America: according to the eclectic subtitle of Moderns
book, "ghosts, Protestant subcultures, machines, and their metaphors
. . . mass media, Moby-Dick , spirituality, phrenology, anthropology,

Sing Sing Penitentiary, and sex with the new motive power." This
comical and perverse list carries an unnerving argument-by-invitation: that we might each of us extend the list, according to our lights.

For in Modern s view, the names of this demon are Legion and,
more trying, they possess America. The secular imaginary itself
could have been, perhaps should have been, added to Modern s list.
It seems true, perhaps by definition, that this secular imaginary
"defies logic," not least of all the logic of Modern s critical account.

But because that secular imaginary is, as Modern points out, "a languages'-indeed, a living language- and therefore far from defying
use and expression, I don't think it defies exposure and description.

Such at any rate is my premise here, where I take a philological
rather than a philosophical approach to the issues Modern addresses.
That is to say, I try not to imagine that we students stand aside our

subjects. My view proceeds from the inner standing point of my
American language. In this way I hope to turn a small screw on the
prevailing logic of critical method in order to seize the advantage
one gains from close encounter where, as Laura (Riding) Jackson
might say, "failure stalks in every word" (66).

I say "a small screw" because I take my bearings from the peace
and friendship Indian treaties- a corpus of American discourse
undervalued by scholars of "Classic American Literature" and its
abounding sequels: the scenes of encounter engaged- and then variously recorded- in the conferences and formal treaties made
between Native Americans and Anglo-Americans from the early seventeenth century through the founding of the American republic in

155

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

156 Paideuma 44
the late eighteenth century. In those colonial documents, along with

the contemporary narratives and commentaries that fill out their
social and historical contexts, we can discover important upstream
sources for what would later become a vast watershed.11 Deploying
an ecological figure in the subtitle to one of his most famous and
influential works (The Pioneers), Fenimore Cooper called that watershed "The Sources of the Susquehanna." A complex river system was
Cooper s figure for the complex American history that was his book s
true subject.12
Almost 100 years ago Lawrence Wroth wrote a trenchant essay on

the significance of these documentary remains. He called the
treaties

a neglected literary type that arose without conscious artistic design from the
conflict of two distinct civilizations on the same soil- a type in which one
reads the passion, the greed, and the love of life of hard-living men brought
into close relationship without parallel conditions in the history of either race
to guide its conduct. (766)

The sentence is remarkable is several ways. Consider first of all that

he describes these encounters as a "conflict of two distinct civilizations ." With few early American exceptions- Thomas Morton and
Roger Williams are notable- the Western view has been, and still
generally is, that Contact was between civilized (Early Modern) and
uncivilized (Neolithic) peoples. Equally remarkable is that Wroth
correctly saw "a neglected literary type" in these materials. But his
account did not go on to parse this overlooked genre or explicate its

deep significance. The deficiency was in great part removed by the
ethno-historian of Native America William N. Fenton in his seminal
essay "Structure, Continuity, and Change in the Process of Iroquois
Treaty Making."
Given the number and variety of treaties and treaty-makers in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Fenton s focus on the Iroquois
might seem too restricted. But in fact he chose well. First of all, the

documentary record he could draw on is large and, even more
important, historically comprehensive. That archive allowed Fenton

to explain more than the impressive public policy coherence of the
Covenant Chain treaties that Benjamin Franklin made famous

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGarin / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism *57

when he published records of thirteen in his series of impressive
folios.13 Fenton went behind the surface features of the treaties to dis-

close the imaginative vision that shaped their meaning. The treaties
were a structured, flexible, and highly articulated set of social cere-

monies that could involve thousands of participants and that typically lasted many days, weeks, even months.
More than "the product of the interaction of the two cultures," the
treaties were "a species of drama in which the Iroquois were the playwrights, the directors, and teaching actors, and the joint producers
with the colonial hosts" (Fenton 7). 14 Fenton sketched in good detail
the general ritual forms and treaty protocols that grew organically

with the historical emergence of the Iroquois Confederacy itself.
They were a great Indian power in the regions where the British were

establishing their early settlements in the seventeenth century. By
the late seventeenth century, as the colonies matured and the settlers

began pushing further westward, the Iroquois League had become
the chief native power in the region.
Most important of all, Fenton s synthetic analysis of the Iroquois

Covenant Chain treaties threw into relief a widely dispersed Native
American cultural mindset. We now think of the treaties almost
exclusively in relation to their non-native participants, the New England, Middle, and Southern colonies that entered into them. But the
Iroquois treaties were a social deduction drawn out of a general diplo-

matic system that was operating well before the Europeans found
their way to North America.

The Iroquois treaty design is a social machinery for establishing
peace and cooperation in a scene fraught with the threat of violence.

It pivots on the gift exchange rituals- "total prestation"- famously
described in Marcel Mauss s The Gift. Initiating and maintaining
ceremonial gift exchanges were fundamental to the Neolithic civilizations of North America. In his classic study Stone Age Economics ,
Marshall Sahlins explicated Mauss s theory of gift exchange through

an extended comparison with Hobbes s Leviathan. For both Hobbes
and Mauss, because "the understructure of society is war" (Sahlins
171), mechanisms for avoiding its destructive inertia are imperative.
Hobbes s first law of nature "is to seek Peace, and follow it" (177), and

the modern secular state is the means for institutionalizing his
famous Laws of Nature.15 "So in structure, [Hobbes s] argument

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

158 Paideuma 44
unites with Mauss s. . . . Hobbes understands the suppression of
Warre neither through the victory of one nor by the submission of all,

but in a mutual surrender ' (177). That is the equivalent of Mauss s
total prestation, the giving of gifts laying upon the receiver the obligation of reciprocity. In Sahlins' summary:
The Gift transposes the classic alternatives of war and trade from the periphery

to the very center of social life, and from the occasional episode to the continuous presence. . . . [Primitive society is at war with Warre, and ... all their
dealings are treaties of peace. All their exchanges, that is to say, must bear in
their material design some political burden of reconciliation. (182)

The native people of America understood the authority and power
of native kinship rules and gift-giving rituals. But because their histo-

ries and geographies were not completely aligned- Abenaki and
Ojibway, Narragansett and Pequot, Powhatan and Susquehannock,
Iroquois and Algonquin- they were regularly thrown into the blood
feuds and mourning wars that were a function of their own kinship

obligations.16 The Iroquois League was created- probably sometime
in the fifteenth century- around a series of ceremonial institutions

that brought the original "Five Nations" of the League into cooperative relations. Those were the Onondaga, Oneida, Seneca, Cayuga,
and Mohawk.

So founded, the original Iroquois League fashioned a system of
diplomatic intercourse that many different people throughout the
region, native as well as non-native, could accommodate. When
Benjamin Franklin proposed his famous Albany Plan at the Congress of 1755, he explicitly invoked the example of the Iroquois Confederacy. A coalition of allied colonies seemed to him the best means
"for our common defense and Security." As his celebrated cartoon of
the dissevered snake urged: "Join, or die." While his Albany Plan was
rejected at the 1855 Congress, it would be in great part adopted when
the colonies became the Confederate States of America and, finally,
the United States of America.17

The allied nations of the Iroquois League supplied the public ritual that shaped what we call the series of Covenant Chain treaty
makings (1677-1768), which involved different Crown colonies as
well as many indigenous people of the eastern region. The structure

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGann / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 159

was a sophisticated dilation of the gift-exchange ceremonies that
were such an axial feature of native societies in North America. The

Iroquois League executed a complex public event for renewing "the
charter myth of the Great Peace" (Fenton 14), whose outward and
visible sign was the Iroquois League itself. The ceremonies reflect
and replay the events in the foundational epic of Deganawidah, the
legendary Iroquois prophet who revealed "the Great Law" of peace
that founded the Iroquois Confederacy, the alliance of five (and
eventually six) nations that had previously been in recurrent conflict.
English settlers and native people entered into their first treaty in

1621. It was made between the Plymouth colony and Massasoit, the
sachem of the Wampanoag Confederacy. Although the Plymouth
settlers immediately abstracted it to a documentary record (March
1621), the treaty itself involved a series of diplomatic ceremonies and

gift exchanges that extended over nine months and culminated in
that mythic American event called "the first Thanksgiving."18 As for

the treaties with the Iroquois League, the earliest record we have is
the 1645 Treaty of Trois-Rivières made with New France. James N.
Fenton, Francis Jennings, and Mary Drucke have elucidated the
form, symbology, and historical context of this treaty, supplying as
well a reprint of an English translation of the original account from

the Jesuit Relations ( Iroquois Diplomacy 127-53). Unlike the record
of the 1621 treaty, the Jesuit Relations set down an unusually meticulous account of the events as they were orchestrated by the Iroquois

for their French hosts. But the two treaties exhibit the same basic
structure of Maussian reciprocal gift exchange ceremonials that get
repeated over time.19 The Treaty of Trois-Rivières shows, in addition,
the sophisticated forms that the Iroquois brought to the basic native

gift-exchange rituals of the Covenant Chain treaties. Fenton has
neatly summarized the "paradigm" that these spectacular ceremonials followed (28-30). A decisive innovation of Iroquois treaty making

was the Condolence Ceremony ( Iroquois Diplomacy 150, 151), perhaps the most distinctive feature of Iroquois treaty-making: what the

Jesuit recording the Treaty of Trois-Rivières called a "bond ... to
console . . . and to wipe away . . . tears, according to the fashion of
the barbarians" (150, 151). 20

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

i6o Paideuma 44
CODA AS INCONCLUSIVE UNSCIENTIFIC POSTSCRIPT
I have been sketching a crucial part of a continuous history stretching from the early seventeenth century to the late eighteenth cen-

tury. It describes the principal means of social and political contact
in the foundational colonial period. American native peoples and
English immigrant communities negotiated their practical lifeworld
relations through "barbarian" diplomatic protocols.
To the extent that accommodation rather than force was the set-

tlers' chosen modus operandi with the Indians, the available means
were different versions of these native gift-exchange ceremonials.
They mark an exceptionalism that has never been considered in the

obsessive discussions of American Exceptionalism. The subject is
normally taken up within a Western secular imagination of historical

continuities and social progress. Of course, even such stadial imaginations of change recognize that they involve cultural upheaval, as
Karl Polanyi's epochal work The Great Transformation (1944)
showed.

But Polanyi s tale of the Wests struggle to move from feudal to
modern social and economic institutions is thoroughly Western in its

focus. It does not reflect the radical character of the encounters
between natives and invaders on American soil: a centuries-long
face-to-face rendezvous between two profoundly different types of
civilization; in the stadial terminology that still dominates our think-

ing, one Early Modern, the other Neolithic. To grasp the radical
character of the difference, consider the ioo-year-long British struggle to conquer Ireland, an event that overlapped the British invasion
of America and supplied the invader with many of its military and
civic leaders.21 In that case, the English were clashing with a late feu-

dal civilization from which England itself was only beginning to
emerge. Despite fierce divisions, not least of all religious divisions,
the parties shared common memetic forms and were often able to

meet on common ground. America was completely different
because it already had sophisticated economic and social mechanisms that the Euro-Americans had to study and learn. Crucially,
those native means for mitigating or preventing hostilities and, more
positively, for enabling trade and social intercourse were civic instruments of aboriginal design.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGanri / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 161

The native mechanisms reflect a need for conservative and stabi-

lizing mechanisms in social spaces prone to violence and war. They
are the political face of those subsistence economies that Marshall
Sahlins in 1972 called "The Original Affluent Society." In our postmodern perspective, Sahlins s view seems at once true, preposterous,
and unsettling.22 Firsthand seventeenth-century witnesses confirm
that truth when they marvel at the rich natural resources of the New
World. They all testify to and corroborate the power of the Neolithic
subsistence technologies they discovered with the discovery of Amer-

ica. But to John Locke- who never set foot in America, though he
was deeply involved in exploiting its resources- the view was prepos-

terous. As he remarks in his Second Treatise of Civil Government
(1690), Native Americans "are rich in Land, and poor in all the Comforts of Life."23 The contradiction between those perspectives turns

deeply unsettling when we suspect, as many now do, that extreme
social alienation and conditions of endemic poverty are intimately
bound up with technological achievements and political progress on
one hand, and with ecological degradation and global threats to the
biosphere on the other.

What is haunting America is a stunned memory negatively preserved in those treaties, where a social mechanism for sustaining
Generation through Nonviolence was set in motion to blunt or arrest

the social inertias, both native and non-native, of Regeneration
through Violence (Slotkin). The English parties that originally coop-

erated in colonial treatymaking generally did so in bad faith, and
after the Revolution they apostacized altogether. Although forced by

circumstance to participate in "barbarian" political ceremonies, the
English immigrants regarded them for almost two centuries as tem-

porizing social expedients that they would sooner or later leave
behind, as in fact they did. Because the native people who devised
those ceremonies lived in territorialized ecospace and moved to
cyclic, seasonal time, "temporizing social expedients" had a very different valence. For the native people, to be civilized meant to be sen-

sible about the encompassing natural world, on one hand, and to
work out stable, expedient, and timely social mechanisms on the
other. Those would be the treaties that (a) were based in total prestation, and (b) had to be regularly renewed.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

i62 Paideuma 44
But for the apostates and especially for their children who constructed a Classic American Literature, the memory of a lost civiliza-

tion preserved a secret life. We glimpse it in Crevecoeur s Letters
from an American Farmer (1782) and even more in Jeffersons Notes
on the State of Virginia (1785) and the tormented fictions of Charles

Brockden Brown. But it is the career of James Fenimore Cooper
where the dark truth of lost civilization - native and non-native becomes first completely visible. At that point, what we call "American Literature" began in earnest.
Which of the documents of western civilization before James Fenimore Cooper realized that those documents of barbarism- the gift-

exchange rituals and clasped-hands treaties- were transmitting
messages of great importance for downstream America? We know
that Franklin was listening both from his famous treaty folios and
from his Albany Plan, which looked back to the organization of the

Iroquois League and forward to the Confederate States of America.
Or consider that while we customarily track the beginning of an
environmental consciousness in America from Cooper to Thoreau,
its roots are native and it was indigenous Americans who sacrificed
their lives to preserve it.
Classic American Literature and culture feeds off its colonial legacies, as we know. The culture of American slavery is a great part of
that inheritance. But at least equally significant has been the legacy

bequeathed through aboriginal/colonial contact. Whether contact
was engaged in the Puritan colonies of New England, the plantation
colonies of the South, or the mercantile Middle Colonies, the events

were tense, perilous, and always brinked to conflict. The Indian
treaties and their white documentary translations provide an invalu-

able-if also fractured and obscured- record of foundational American history.

Or consider briefly an early derivative record, the epochal Last of

the Mohicans , which ends with an elaborate Condolence Ceremony. But in Cooper s mournful representation, it is not being practiced, it is being dismally elegized. The scene shows native American
history mutating into white American myth. Presiding over the cere-

mony is the Delaware sachem Tamenund (ca. 1625- ca. 1701), whose
treaty making with William Penn licensed the happy American legend of Indian/colonial peace and friendship treaty making. We now

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGann / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 163
know that those founding treaty arrangements were far less happy

than legend has argued.24 When Tamenund reappears in Cooper s
work he is a literal ghost, having died a half century before the date
of the action of Cooper's "Narrative of 1757." Cooper s re-enactment

of the Condolence Ceremony is thus a spectral event, as we see
when Colonel Munro, mourning the deaths of Uncas and his child
Cora, addresses the assembly. "The time shall not be distant," Munro

dreams, "when we may assemble . . . without distinction of sex, or
rank, or color." To which Cooper appends Leatherstocking s mordant gloss:
The scout listened to the tremulous voice in which the veteran delivered
these words, and shook his head slowly when they were ended, as one who
doubted their efficacy. "To tell them this," he said, "would be to tell them that
the snows come not in the winter, or that the sun shines fiercest when the
trees are stripped of their leaves." (Chapter 33)

The Last of the Mohicans ends in a Condolence Ceremony of peace
and friendship that Cooper s work remembers but disbelieves. His
career from The Last of the Mohicans (1826) to The Crater (1847) will

follow an arc of deepening skepticism, and a long line of American
imaginative reflection will inherit and perpetuate that unhappy con-

science. Reflecting on "Edgar Poe s Significance," Whitman called
that conscience the "malady" of America (230). Poe, Melville, Twain,
Henry Adams, the late James of The American Scene : in each we read

the tormented renunciation of the exceptional American Dream
originally revealed- unexpectedly, unbelievably- with aboriginal
Contact.
Paradoxically, the dream would survive through all those confessions of betrayal and disbelief. Even the Belle of Amherst made her
work a mirror, and herself an index, of her Strange Nation s contradictory estrangements.25 We do not forget her 11 June 1852 letter to

her beloved Susan. Reflecting on the Whig convention in Baltimore
being torn apart over the question of slavery, Dickinson added a mor-

dant postscript: "'Delenda esť America, Massachusetts and all!" And
then came the letter s famous last words, warning Susan to "open me
carefully" lest her forlorn testament shock her friend or, perhaps, her
father, who was attending the convention and was carrying the letter

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

164 Paideuma 44
to Susan (1:211-12). 26 A great American Apostate's Creed, those two

sentences could be an epigraph for the internal exile she chose, the
world elsewhere she imagined and lived.
NOTES
1. Hofstadter's remark is often quoted- for instance, in Seymour Lipseťs classic
study, 18.

2. The phrase is D. H. Lawrences, from his Studies in Classic American Literature
(1923, 1924).

3. The study of Indian treaties probably should begin with the following two works:
Julian P. Boyd, ed., Indian Treaties Printed by Benjamin Franklin 1736-1762 (1938),
and Francis Jennings et al., ed., The History and Culture of Iroquois Diplomacy
(1995). Other important works, in chronological order, are: Lawrence C. Wroth,
"The Indian Treaty as Literature" (1928), Constance Rourke, The Roots of American
Culture and Other Essays (1942), A. M. Drummond and Richard Moody, "Indian
Treaties: The First American Dramas" (1953), Francis Jennings, The Ambiguous Iroquois Empire (1984), Colin G. Calloway, Dawnland Encounters (1991), Robert A.
Williams, Jr., Linking Arms Together (1997), James H. Merrell, "A Sort of Confusion:

Treaties" (1999), Bruce E. Johansen, ed., Enduring Legacies: Native American
Treaties and Contemporary Controversies (2004), and Colin G. Calloway, Pen and
Ink Witchcraft (2013).

4. Other treaties in the colonial period were imposed forcibly upon native people by
colonials who had defeated them in war. These are not the treaties I am concerned
with here. The clasped-hands figure appears on wampum treaty belts and eventually
found its way into the embossed treaty medals that were a regular feature of later
treaties- when, ironically, only the white hand wielded authority.
5. The actual event turned out even more messy. He decided to write a new poem
for the occasion and did, but the weather was so blustery that he couldn't read what
he'd newly written, so he spontaneously began reciting "The Gift Outright" from
memory. See Axelrod 209-10.
6. Like all the land cessions made by the chief of the Wampanoag Confederacy to
the Plymouth Colony, the Capowack gift was a gift of usufruct rights. See Cronon,
chapter 4.

7. I say "in great measure" because we do have some wampum records for the late
treaties (see Iroquois Indians: A Documentary History ). In general, "Wampum served
as aids to memory and storytelling as well as being ritualized gifts and records of
agreements" (Calloway 27). But the colonial wampum record is seriously fractured
and we remain uncertain, even profoundly ignorant, about how it was operating in
the treatymaking ceremonies except in the most general ways. See Speck and Snyderman, "The Function of Wampum in Iroquois Religion." More studies of these
documents as treaty records are needed. Mary A. Drucke's "Iroquois Treaties" in Iroquois Diplomacy is the best place to start. Useful discussion can be found in J. R.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGarin / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 165
Miller; Calloway, Pen and Ink Witchcraft , 25-32; and Williams 51-58.
8. Ottawa chief Egushawa originally used the phrase in 1791 when he spoke of "pen
and ink witchcraft, [by] which they can make to speak things we never intended, or
had any idea of, even an hundred years hence; just as they please" (11). The phrase
enters the title of Calloway's excellent study. Note Egushawa 's "an hundred years
since" and the depth of the cultural memory it signals.
9. See Vaughan, ed., 4:8-9, 28. Seth Mallios has demonstrated how "[deteriorating
exchange-based relations" undermined the settlement efforts at Ajacan, Roanoke,

and Jamestown (23), but, as Mallios shows (see 21, 61, 69, 101-3), "exchangebased relations" were weak and uncertain from the outset.
10. For Massasoit's comment, see Johansen, Encyclopedia , 211-12, and Marder, 10110. See also Cronon; Waters; and Snyderman, "Concepts of Land Ownership."
1 1. 1 adopt this riverine analogy from the work of the great ethno-historian of Native

American history William N. Fenton (see below).
12. See my discussion of this matter in my essay "Philological Investigation II. A
Page from Cooper," in A New Republic of Letters , 179-81.
13. These are the treaties in Boyd's edition.
14. Fenton calls the colonists the treaty "hosts" because the Covenant Chain treaty
events nearly always took place at colonial venues (Albany, Lancaster, etc). The
political implication of this arrangement should not be misunderstood. It is a sign of
deference to the Indian nations, whose presence at the treaties has to be requested
by the Crown colonies, who are also expected to bear the entire expense of the event
(an obligation that the colonial hosts would often complain about).
15. See Leviathan Book I, chapter 14: "the first and fundamental law of Nature,
which is, 'to seek peace, and follow it.' The second, the sum of the right of Nature,
which is, 'by all means we can, to defend ourselves.' From this fundamental law of
Nature, by which men are commanded to endeavour peace, is derived this second
law, 'that a man be willing, when others are so too, as far-forth as for peace and
defence of himself he shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all things, and

be contented with so much liberty against other men as he would allow other men
against himself.' For as long as every man holdeth this right of doing anything he
liketh, so long are all men in the condition of war. But if other men will not lay down

their right as well as he, then there is no reason for any one to divest himself of his;
for that were to expose himself to prey, which no man is bound to, rather than to dis-

pose himself to peace."
16. On mourning wars see Richter; and Williams 53-57.
17. See Shannon.
18. The 1621 treaty was first recorded in William Bradford's diary of the first year of

the settlement and then again later in his extended history Of Plymouth Plantation .
The diary was first published in 1622 in a work now known as M ourťs Relation (see
Dexter). Bradford's MS Of Plymouth Plantation , composed over a period of years
(1630-1650), was first published in 1856.
19. The eastern Algonquian tribes, including the Wampanoag tribes, adopted the
Iroquois kaswentha ceremonials; see Speck.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

i66 Paideuma 44
20. Williams 53-61 gives a succinct account of the Condolence Ceremony and its
relation to the Deganawida mythos. For the actual structure of the ceremonial see
Fenton's commentary, 17-22. Jon Parmenter has many useful insights into the early
history of Iroquois treatying with the French. See also where he points out that the
treaties and councils were designed to facilitate a subsistence use of the land (2941)-

21. "Assigning the Indians to Satan began almost with the first encounter" (Lovejoy
606). See also Takaki.
22. Marshall Sahlins, Stone Age Economics ; see especially chapter 1.
23. See chapter 5 ("Of Property"), especially section 41. See also Cronon s commentary (54-55, 78-79) on Morton and Locke's different views.
24. The legend of the amity between William Penn and Tamenend (Tammany,
Tamenund) and the land sessions is the focus of Benjamin West's famous painting
Treaty with the Indians (1771-1772). That the relations between the two were more
difficult is now clear, however. In 1684, three years after Tamenend gifted lands to
Penn, the sachem took a very different line, and Penn- back in England- wrote to
his surveyor that Tamenend should be handled with severity. See Varga. "In 1685
after Penn returned to England, Tammany apparently regretted the cession of territory and warned the new settlers to vacate the land. Some reportedly took his threats
seriously and moved to New Jersey. To still the panic, Penn ordered measures taken
to bring Tammany to order." Weslager 169. See also Myers, ed., where the matter is
taken up at 24-25 and 83-91.
25. See Kennedy's recent Strange Nation.
26. Dickinson has in mind the tensions fracturing the Whig party as it was about to
open its convention in June 1852. See Erkkila's comprehensive assessment of Dickinson's social and political views.

WORKS CITED
Axelrod, Steven Gould. "Frost and the Cold War." Robert Frost in Context. Ed.
Mark Richardson. New York: Cambridge UP, 2014. 207-xx. Print.
Banner, Stuart. How the Indians Lost their Land: Law and Power on the Frontier.
Cambridge: Harvard UP: 2005. Print.
Billington, Ray. Foreword. Van Every i:v-ix.

Boyd, Julian P., ed. Indian Treaties Printed by Benjamin Franklin I7Ì6-1762.
Philadelphia: Historical Society of Pennsylvania, 1928. Print.
Bradford, William. History of Plymouth Plantation. Ed. Charles Deane. Boston:
Massachusetts Historical Society, 1856. Print.
Calloway, Colin G. Dawnland Encounters: Indians and Europeans in Northern New
England. Hanover, NH: UP of New England, 1991. Print.
- . Pen and Ink Witchcraft: Treaties and Treaty Making in Native American History.
Oxford and New York: Oxford UP, 2013. Print.
Coates, Ta-Nehisi. Between the World and Me. New York: Spiegel and Grau, 2015.
Print.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGann / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 167
Cooper, James Fenimore. The Last of the Mohicans. 2 vols. Philadelphia: H. C.
Carey & I. Lea, 1826. Print.
Cronon, William. Changes in the Land : Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New
England. New York: Hill and Wang, 1983. Print.
Dexter, Henry Martyn, ed. Mourťs Relation or Journal of the Plantation at Plymouth. Boston: John Kimball Wiggin, 1865. Print.

Dickinson, Emily. Letters of Emily Dickinson. Ed. Thomas H. Johnson and
Theodora Ward. 3 vols. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1958. Print.
Drucke, Mary A. "Iroquois Treaties. Common Forms, Varying Interpretations." Jennings, et al., ed. 85-114.
Drummond, A. M., and Richard Moody. "Indian Treaties: The First American Dramas." Quarterly Journal of Speech 39 (1953): 15-24- Print.
Egushawa. Minutes of Debates in Council, on the Banks of the Ottawa River, November, 1791. Baltimore: Warner & Hanna, 1800. Print.
Erkkila, Betsy. "Dickinson and the Art of Politics." A Historical Guide to Emily Dickinson. Ed. Vivian R. Pollack. Oxford UP: New York, 2004. 133-74. Print.
Fenton, William N. "Structure Continuity, and Change in the Process of Iroquois
Treaty Making." Jennings, et al., ed. 3-36.
Frost, Robert. Collected Prose. Ed. Mark Richardson. Cambridge, MA: Belknap P of
Harvard UP, 2007. Print.
- . "The Gift Outright." The Poetry of Robert Frost : The Collected Poems Complete
and Unabridged. Ed. Edward Connery Latham. New York: Henry Holt, 1979.
348. Print.

Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan. London, 1651. Print.
Iroquois Indians : A Documentary History of the Diplomacy of the Six Nations and the
League. 50 reels. Woodbridge, CT: Research Publications, 1984. Microform.
Jackson, Laura (Riding). The Telling. New York: Harper and Row, 1973. Print.
Jefferson, Thomas. Notes on the State of Virginia. 1785. Print.
Jennings, Francis. The Ambiguous Iroquois Empire. The Covenant Chain Confederation of Indian Tribes with English Colonies from its Beginnings to the Lancaster
Treaty of 1744. New York: W. W. Norton, 1984. Print.
-, et al., ed. The History and Culture of Iroquois Diplomacy : An Interdisciplinary
Guide to the Treaties of the Six Nations and their League. Syracuse: Syracuse
UP, 1995. Print.

Johansen, Bruce E., ed. Encyclopedia of Native American Economic History. Westport, CT: Greenwood P, 1999. Print.
- . Enduring Legacies: Native American Treaties and Contemporary Controversies.
Foreword by Vine De Loria Jr. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004. Print.
Kennedy, J. Gerald. Strange Nation: Literary Nationalism and Cultural Conflict in
the Age of Poe. New York: Oxford UP, 2016.
Lawrence, D. H. Studies in Classic American Literature. 1923, 1924. Print.
Lipset, Seymour. American Exceptionalism: A Double-Edged Sword. New York:
W. W. Norton, 1996. Print.
Locke, John. Second Treatise of Civil Government. 1690. Print.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

i68 Paideuma 44
Lovejoy, David S. "Satanizing the American Indian." New England Quarterly 67.4
(Dec. 1994): 603-21. Print.
Mallios, Seth. The Deadly Politics of Giving : Exchange and Violence in Ajacan?
Roanoke , and Jamestown. Tuscaloosa: U of Alabama P, 2006. Print.
Marder, William. Indians in the Americas. San Diego: The Book Tree, 2005. Print.
Mauss, Marcel. The Gift : Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies.
Trans. Ian Cunnison. Introduction by E. E. Evans-Pritchard. New York: Norton, 1967. Print.

McGann, Jerome. A New Republic of Letters : Memory and Scholarship in an Age of
Digital Reproduction. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2014. Print.
Merrell, James H. "A Sort of Confusion: Treaties." Into the American Woods. New
York: Norton, 1999. 253-301. Print.
Miller, J. R. Compacty Contracty Covenant : Aboriginal Treaty-Making in Canada.
Toronto: U of Toronto P, 2009. Print.
Miller, Perry. Errand into the Wilderness. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1952. Print.
Modern, John. Secularism in Antebellum America. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2011.
284. Print.

Myers, Albert Cook, ed. William Penns Own Account of the Lenni Lenape or
Delaware Indians. Rev. ed. Somerset, NJ, 1937. Print.
Parmenter, Jon. Edge of the Woods: Iroquoiay 1534-1701. Lansing: Michigan State
UP, 2010. Print.

Richter, Daniel K. The Ordeal of the Longhouse : The Peoples of the Iroquois League
in the Era of European Colonization. Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 1992.
Print.

Rourke, Constance. The Roots of American Culture and Other Essays. Ed. Van
Wyck Brooks. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1942. Print.
Sahlin, Marshall. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine Atherton, 1972. Print.
Shannon, Timothy J. Indians and Colonists at the Crossroads of Empire: The Albany
Congress of 1754. Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP, 2000. Print.
Slotkin, Richard. Regeneration Through Violence: The Mythology of the American
Frontier 1600-1860. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan UP, 1974. Print.
Snyderman, George S. "Concepts of Land Ownership Among the Iroquois and their
Neighbors." Symposium on Local Diversity in Iroquois Culture. Ed. William N.
Fenton. Smithsonian Institution. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 149.
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1051. 15-24. Print.
Snyderman, George. "The Function of Wampum in Iroquois Religion." Proceedings
of the American Philosophical Society 105. 6 (15 Dec. 1961): 571-608. Print.
Speck, Frank. "The Functions of Wampum Among the Eastern Algonkian." American Anthropological Association Memoirs VI (1919): 3-71. Print.
Takaki, Ronald. "The Tempest in the Wilderness: The Racialization of Savagery."
Journal of American History 79. 3 (1992): 892-912. Print.
Trotsky, Leon. History of the Russian Revolution. Trans. Max Eastman. Chicago:
Haymarket Books, 2008. Print.
Van Every, Dale. The Frontier People of America (1754-1845). 4 vols. New York:
Morrow, 1960-1965. Print.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Jerome McGanri / Indian Treaties and American Exceptionalism 169
Varga, Nicholas. "Americas Patron Saint: Tammany." Journal of American Culture
10.4 (1987): 45-51. Print.
Vaughan, Alden T., ed. Early American Indian Documents: Treaties and Laws ,
1607-178 9. Washington, DC: University Publications of America, 1979. Print.
Waters, Frank. Brave Are My People. Santa Fe: Clear Light Publishers, 1993. Print.
Weslager, C. A. The Delaware Indians : A History. New Brunswick NJ, 1972. Print.
Whitman, Walt. Specimen Days. Prose Works 1892 , Volume 1. Ed. Floyd Stovall.
New York: NYU P, 1963. Print.
Williams, Robert A., Jr. Linking Arms Together : American Indian Treaty Visions of
Law and Peacey 1600-1800. Oxford UP: New York, 1997. Print.
Wroth, Lawrence C. "The Indian Treaty as Literature." Yale Review 17 (1928): 74966. Print.

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:22:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


