---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Anishinabek News
Title: Maamwizing: People Collaborating Together
Author: Laura Barrios
Date: Fri, 29 Apr 2022 07:00:40 -0400
Link: http://anishinabeknews.ca/2022/04/29/maamwizing-people-collaborating-together/
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
 
Back Row (L-R): Ophelia O’Donnell, Alicia WIlliamson, Cheyenne Oechsler. Front 
Row (L-R): Dr. Joey-Lynn Wabie, Dr. Susan Manitowabi, Marnie Anderson. – Photo 
supplied
 
SUDBURY (April 25, 2022) — The Anishinaabe term maamwizing refers to “people 
collaborating together.” While research can often be regarded as an 
overwhelming, intimidating, and even lonely process, Maamwizing holds a 
different view and, in turn, offers a unique experience for students. Discovery,
rooted in collaboration, encompasses the Maamwizing Indigenous Research 
Institute’s approach to honouring Indigenous worldviews through holistic 
relationships between nii’kinaagaanaa (all my relations), which includes all 
that is above, below, and around us, bringing these elements into our work.
 
“Knowledge sharing has always been a traditional practice among Indigenous 
communities, empowering generations of learners to explore and understand their 
world. It is akin to ceremony, informing our journey and relationship with the 
elements,” explains Dr. Susan Manitowabi, Interim Associate Vice-President with 
the Office of Academic and Indigenous Programs.
 
“Maamwizing recognizes the deliberate sharing of knowledge and history is a 
sacred transfer of wisdom, safeguarded by the principles of respect and 
reciprocity. The honour to learn from communities and receive this transfer must
be earned through relationship building and approached with humility. This is 
where Maamwizing always begins but never ends the relationship,” adds Dr. Joey 
Lynn Wabie, Maamwizing’s Interim Director, a Laurentian alumnus, and Assistant 
Professor in the School of Indigenous Relations. “Emphasizing that 
community-driven research is strength-based and relies on engagement to uncover 
answers and interpret knowledge that has always been, it is never deficit-based 
– we all move forward together in a sustainable way.”
 
Dr. Susan Manitowabi adds that “part of Maamwizing’s research involves exploring
ways of ‘Two-Eyed Seeing’ where we build reciprocal relationships that align 
research initiatives with the community’s needs. We grow, shift, and change as a
result of our relationships, but our journey never ends just because the 
research does; they go on forever.” This mantra is evident in the relationships 
shared by students, faculty, and allies.
 
Students play a central role within Maamwizing through Supporting Aboriginal 
Graduate Enhancements (SAGE) and are involved in a vast variety of research 
projects. Encouraged to attend committee meetings, students learn how to 
contribute to decision-making through collaborative engagement. Ophelia 
O’Donnell, a graduate student from Henvey Inlet First Nation, is actively 
working with Atikameksheng Anishnawbek First Nation in a community engagement 
role.
 
“I joined Maamwizing as a graduate student member and quickly learned that 
Maamwizing is more than a research institute. It is a group in which members can
collaborate, seek guidance, and support each other, beyond research,” she 
states.
 
Alicia Williamson, a fourth-year Indigenous Social Work student hired to learn 
about Indigenous research at the graduate level, works closely with Dr. Wabie 
and shares insights on the impact that Maamwizing has had on her life.
 
“Maamwizing has been fundamental to my growth and exploration of research as an 
Anishinaabe student. It is integral for Indigenous students to see Indigenous 
people within spaces such as Laurentian University as leaders, researchers, and 
change-makers. It is even more critical that Indigenous students are provided 
access to opportunities that allow them to envision themselves in these 
positions.”
 
Maamwizing offers mentorship as well as a safe place for students to gather and 
grow. A home-away-from-home for many students, the unique and nurturing 
opportunity to learn alongside faculty and staff members leads to 
self-determination. Students are welcomed into the Maamwizing family with many 
graduates returning to teach Indigenous Programs or establish careers in the 
North.
 
From an ally perspective, Dr. Kevin Fitzmaurice, Laurentian University’s Truth, 
and Reconciliation Coordinator and Affiliate Member of Maamwizing, recalls an 
early career experience where after listening to a teaching from Elder Michael 
Thrasher, Kevin requested a one-on-one interview with Michael to learn more. 
Michael agreed, and after their first interview, he invited Kevin to call and 
check in the following week. Kevin agreed, and after doing so, the invitation to
call the next week was extended again and then again. Decades later, Kevin 
continues to meet and learn from Michael. Community members and Knowledge 
Keepers are never considered research subjects to Maamwizing; they become family
and life-long friends.
 
Dr. Susan Manitowabi describes the Institute as offering students “a 
culturally-safe space to learn, thrive, and foster relationships as paramount to
the success of their research. We teach our students to learn from dreams and 
legends, to uncover stories that have been carried through generations. 
Indigenous research is uplifting; it is community and curiosity, and the 
understanding of research not as something to be feared but as something to be 
cherished. It is the gift of wisdom passed down through time immemorial.”
 
Beyond lifelong relationships, Maamwizing seeks to produce sustainable research 
outcomes for every community engaged. Dr. Joey-Lynn Wabie shares the reflection 
that “often, researchers will approach their projects with publication as their 
primary goal. At Maamwizing, learning together and sharing our discoveries is 
the goal. Sometimes, our research results look like a community manual rather 
than a scholarly piece where there is a first, second, and third author 
credited. Certainly, we must publish, but how we publish is framed by our desire
to share wisdom and to collaborate in the best interest of the community and as 
a good relative.”
 
Learn more about authentic community-based research and relationship 
building.[3]
 
-30-
 
Contact:
Dr. Susan Manitowabi
Interim Associate Vice-President with the Office of Academic and Indigenous 
Programs
Laurentian University
SManitowabi@laurentian.ca[4]
 
Links: 
[1]: http://anishinabeknews.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Maamwizing-Research-Institute-Profile.jpg (link)
[2]: http://anishinabeknews.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Maamwizing-Research-Institute-Profile-300x160.jpg (image)
[3]: https://laurentian.us17.list-manage.com/track/click?u=a4ae9e04822425064253cc41e&id=a6ad48e3a8&e=8664e44cc2 (link)
[4]: https://laurentian.us17.list-manage.com/track/click?u=a4ae9e04822425064253cc41e&id=ce7c107a29&e=8664e44cc2 (link)

