---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Nationhood
Title: RCMP Invasion of Wet'suwet'en Nation territory breaches Canada's "rule of
law"
Author: Pam Palmater
Date: Wed, 05 Feb 2020 01:47:00 -0500
Link: http://indigenousnationhood.blogspot.com/2020/02/rcmp-invasion-of-wetsuweten-nation.html
 
[image 1 (link #1)]
 
RCMP invades Wet’suwet’en territory. Photo by Amber Bracken; Jan. 7, 2019
 
While Prime Minister Justin Trudeau makes flowery public speeches about 
respecting the rights of Indigenous peoples and reassures the international 
community that there is no relationship more important that the one with 
Indigenous peoples, Canada invaded sovereign Wet’suwet’en Nation territory. When
questioned about this aggressive move at a Liberal fundraiser in Kamloops, 
British Columbia, he responded: “No, obviously, it’s not an ideal situation… But
at the same time, we’re also a country of the rule of law.” Canada’s invasion of
Wet’suwet’en territory through its national police force, the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police (RCMP), is an example of the blatant violation of the rule of law
in favour of corporate interests. Canada has consistently failed to follow the 
rule of law when it comes to Indigenous peoples, and the violent arrests of the 
Wet’suwet’en people at the Gidimt’en checkpoint, set up in support of the 
Unist’ot’en homestead, is a glaring example of Canada’s lawlessness.
 
The people of Wet’suwet’en Nation, as represented by their traditional 
government, have long asserted their sovereign jurisdiction over their Nation’s 
lands which span about 22,000 square kilometres in northwest British Columbia. 
These lands have never been ceded, nor have their rights to use, manage, protect
or govern these lands been extinguished in any way. The Nation has never signed 
any treaty or constitutional agreement that has specifically surrendered their 
sovereignty as a Nation. While there have been many federal and provincial laws 
that have interfered with First Nation laws in general, there has never been an 
explicit extinguishment of Wet’suwet’en laws and jurisdiction over their 
Nation’s sovereign territory. Their land rights are not only recognized in 
Canada’s Constitution Act, 1982, but they are also protected in numerous 
international treaties and declarations, like the United Nations Declaration on 
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). In other words, there was no legal 
basis for Canada to invade their territory.
 
The Wet’suwet’en Nation is a governing Nation that has existed since time 
immemorial. They are made up of five clans: Gil_seyhu (Big Frog), Laksilyu 
(Small Frog), Gitdumden (Wolf/Bear), Laksamshu (Fireweed), and Tsayu (Beaver). 
The Wet’suwet’en are organized through a system of hereditary leaders and have a
complex system of governance. While Canada did force the chief and council 
system on First Nations through the Indian Act, it was not successful in 
extinguishing or displacing the Nation’s traditional government. This is 
evidenced in the fact that when the Wet’suwet’en Nation decided to assert their 
land rights in Canada’s courts, they did so as a Nation, through their 
traditional government as represented by their hereditary leaders.
 
In Delgamuuwk v. British Columbia (1997), the Wet’suwet’en, together with the 
Gitksan, asserted title to their lands. While the issue was ordered back to 
trial, the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) made significant findings about the 
nature of Aboriginal title being a right to the land itself. The SCC found that 
the land is held communally, by all members of the Aboriginal Nation for their 
“exclusive use and occupation,” and that this right to land was protected in 
“pre-existing systems of aboriginal law” and Canada’s common law, even before 
the protection of Aboriginal rights in section 35 of the 1982 Constitution Act. 
No laws have since extinguished Wet’suwet’en rights with regards to their 
territory. Also significant is the fact that according to SCC jurisprudence, 
Aboriginal title contains an inherent limitation, in that title lands can’t be 
used in a way that is “irreconcilable” with the nature of the Nation’s 
attachment to those lands. The SCC explained it this way: “Implicit in the 
protection of historic patterns of occupation is a recognition of the importance
of continuity of the relationship of an aboriginal community to its land over 
time.”
 
What can we take from this case? Well, according to Canadian law, we know that 
it is the “Aboriginal Nation,” in this instance the Wet’suwet’en Nation, that 
has the legal ownership of their traditional territories, not an individual 
band. So it matters little that some of the bands may have signed an agreement 
with the pipeline company, especially if they did so in relation to territory 
off the reserve and without the free, prior and informed consent of the people. 
We also know that the lands are not held by individuals, but by the whole 
Nation. Thus any decisions in relation to those lands rest with the Nation. We 
also know that the purpose of section 35 is to protect the many ways in which 
Aboriginal Nations enjoy their title lands and these Nations can’t use them in 
ways which are inconsistent with those uses. The SCC specifically stated that if
Aboriginal title lands are used as hunting grounds, then the land can’t be used 
in a way that destroys its value – as in strip mining.
 
In the present case, not only were the Wet’suwet’en people using and occupying 
their lands, they were also protecting their lands from destruction by the 
Coastal GasLink pipeline slated to go through their territory. If Aboriginal 
Nations can’t risk destroying their title lands for extractive projects, 
certainly corporations should not be permitted to do so. It’s also clear that 
despite the media reports, this was never about a protest. This was always about
occupying and protecting their lands – something they have the legal right to 
do. This is where the so-called “rule of law” comes into play. The rule of law 
is touted by Canada every time it actually wants to break the law; according to 
the United Security Council, rule of law means:
 
  All persons, institutions and entities, public and private … are accountable 
  to laws that are publicly promulgated, equally enforced and independently 
  adjudicated, and which are consistent with international human rights norms 
  and standards.
 
 
It becomes very clear then, that Canada has a long history of breaching the rule
of law when it comes to First Nations. In the Wet’suwet’en case, Canada has 
prioritized the extraction interests of a corporation over the constitutionally 
protected rights of a sovereign Aboriginal Nation. This is a clear violation of 
the law. The Wet’suwet’en right to occupy and protect their territory is an 
internationally recognized human rights norm, now reflected in UNDRIP. Article 8
provides the right of Indigenous peoples not to be subjected to the destruction 
of their culture – something that would naturally come from destruction of their
lands and waters with a pipeline.
 
Article 10 provides that Indigenous peoples will not be forcibly removed from 
their lands or territories – as was done by the RCMP who arrested and removed 
Wet’suwet’en people from their own lands. Articles 25 and 26 specifically 
protect the rights of Indigenous peoples to own, use and control their 
traditional lands, waters, coastal seas and resources and further protects their
rights to “uphold their responsibilities to their future generations in this 
regard.”
 
Not only has Canada committed to implement UNDRIP into law, it is legally bound 
by many other international human rights treaties that it has ratified. While 
UNDRIP may not yet be law in Canada, it represents the minimum international 
legal norms for recognizing the core human rights of Indigenous peoples – 
something that Canada’s rule of law requires. Canada has also issued a directive
on how it should engage with Indigenous peoples on litigation relating to their 
rights, which Canada claims is based on reconciliation with Indigenous peoples 
and respect for their legal rights. Former Minister of Justice Jody 
Wilson-Raybould made the bold claim that although she was just releasing this 
directive in January 2019, Canada has been using these rules for the last two 
years. It is important to note that this directive states that: “Aboriginal 
rights do not require a court declaration or an agreement in order to be 
recognized.” This is something the SCC has confirmed many times in its 
jurisprudence on the duty to consult, accommodate and get consent.
 
Yet, we know that Canada has not only failed to abide by its own litigation 
directive, but it has blatantly violated Wet’suwet’en laws, Canadian laws, 
international laws and its own purported commitment to the rule of law.
 
When Canada sent the RCMP into sovereign Wet’suwet’en Nation territory to 
destroy their check points and violently arrest and remove Wet’suwet’en people 
from their own lands, it became lawless – an outlaw state. It also violated its 
own litigation directive when the RCMP issued a statement saying that since 
there has been no court case declaring Aboriginal title, the RCMP were justified
in their actions. In denying the Wet’suwet’en their constitutionally protected 
legal right to enjoy their title lands, Canada has prioritized the private, 
economic interests of a corporation – Coastal GasLink Pipeline – over the rule 
of law. As explained by the Wet’suwet’en:
 
  The Unist’ot’en homestead is not a protest or demonstration. Our clan is 
  occupying and using our traditional territory as it has for centuries…. Our 
  homestead is a peaceful expression of our connection to our territory. It is 
  also an example of the continuous use and occupation of our territory by our 
  clan.
 
 
In this case, the laws of Canada were neither equally enforced, nor compliant 
with international human rights standards. Canada is not a country that follows 
the rule of law. Canada makes and breaks laws to suit its own economic and 
political interests, which run counter to those of Indigenous peoples. It is 
time to be honest about it, and call out Canada as an outlaw, and take action to
support the Wet’suwet’en Nation, who have occupied their lands since time 
immemorial.
 
This article was originally published in Canadian Dimension Magazine on April 
24, 2019:
 
https://canadiandimension.com/articles/view/rcmp-invasion-of-wetsuweten-nation-t
erritory-breaches-canadas-rule-of-law[2]
 
 
 
Links: 
[1]: https://canadiandimension.com/images/made/images/articles/_resized/Unistoten_raid_800_448_90.JPG (image)
[2]: https://canadiandimension.com/articles/view/rcmp-invasion-of-wetsuweten-nation-territory-breaches-canadas-rule-of-law (link)

