---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Duke University Press

Chapter Title: That Sole and Despotic Dominion
Book Title: Theft Is Property!
Book Subtitle: Dispossession and Critical Theory
Book Author(s): Robert Nichols
Published by: Duke University Press. (2020)
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv11smqjz.5

­There is nothing which so generally strikes the imagination, and engages the
affections of mankind, as the right of property; or that sole and despotic dominion which one man claims and exercises over the external t­ hings of the
world, in total exclusion of the right of any other individual in the universe.
And yet t­ here are very few, that ­will give themselves the trou­ble to consider
the original and foundation of this right.
—­william blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of ­England, 1765

This chapter develops two genealogies of dispossession. The first, presented
in section I, is a largely intra-­European account whereby the concept
emerges in relation to a host of shifting proximate terms, such as expropriation, confiscation, and eminent domain. I argue that although the term
originally operates within very long-­standing and abstract debates concerning the nature of property per se, by the turn of the nineteenth ­century it
takes on a much narrower, practical function as a tool of critique in relation
to b­ attles against feudalism. Section II turns to a second context: Indigenous
strug­gles against colonization. In this part of the chapter, I seek to differentiate this conception from the first by attending to its unique recursivity. The

This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

chapter concludes in section III by substantiating this argument by providing specific historical examples in the form of nineteenth-­century Anglo
settler property law concerning squatters and homesteaders.

I
In Western Eu­ro­pean ­legal and po­liti­cal thought, ­there is widespread and
long-­standing recognition of the right of the sovereign to appropriate the
property and assets of subjects, forcibly if necessary. Rather than finding a
single unifying concept u­ nder which to subsume this notion, one encounters
instead a complex and confusing array of terms that vary according to time,
location, custom, and vernacular. For the purposes of analytic treatment,
however, this cacophony can be roughly or­ga­nized into a set of four linguistic
“families” in modern En­glish that, while overlapping and interrelated, can
help parse distinct conceptual inflections. They include expropriation, confiscation, eminent domain, and dispossession.
The Latinate term expropriation was introduced into Eu­ro­pean vernacular languages by the revival of Roman ­legal vocabulary by medieval civil and
canon jurisprudents in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Since then, it has
come to name the right of the sovereign to appropriate property for the
sake of the “common good” in some sense or another (publica utilitas, communis utilitas, commune bonum, ­etc.). The paradigmatic expression of this
power has long been the compelled seizure of land required for the building
and maintenance of public infrastructure such as roads or ­castle walls. For
many centuries, of course, it was the sovereign who held ultimate interpretative power over who counted as within the “public” or what was in the
“common good.” As a result, expropriation was a highly flexible power; it
could be expanded or contracted to suit a variety of schemes.1
Precisely ­because expropriation has had this variable scope, it has also
had a retributive function. It this way, it has bled into confiscation. Derived
from the Latin confiscare—­“to seize for the public treasury”—­this term refers to the coercive seizure of property from subjects for the purposes of
punishment. It has been used, for example, to strip criminals of their assets
in the wake of conviction for crimes, or as retribution for po­liti­cal and religious insubordination. For instance, during the American Civil War, the
Union passed two “Confiscation Acts” (1861, 1862) as a means of seizing
southern lands and slaves as a punitive response to treason.2 Confiscation
is sometimes treated as a species of expropriation, since ­legal enforcement
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

17

might reasonably be thought a function of serving the “common good.”
The two remain nevertheless partially distinct since confiscation commonly singles out a par­tic­u­lar individual or group of individuals on the
basis of their actions or standing relative to the sovereign. It is a mode of
punitive forfeiture, tailored to a specific case.3
In 1625 the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius intervened in t­ hese debates and
in so ­doing coined a new term. In On the Law of War and Peace, generally
considered to be a foundational text in the history of international law, he
introduced the term eminent domain as part of his argument that “through
the agency of the king, even a right gained by subjects can be taken from
them in two ways, ­either as a penalty, or by the force of eminent domain
[dominium eminens]. But in order that this may be done by the power of
eminent domain, the first requisite is public advantage; then, that compensation from the public funds be made, if pos­si­ble, to the one who has lost
his right.”4 Grotius did more than introduce a novel term, however. He also
helped shift the register of the debate. His key contribution, followed by
­later thinkers such as John Locke and Samuel von Pufendorf, was to connect the specific right of expropriation to a general theory concerning the
origin and nature of property as such. If the sovereign has a par­tic­u­lar right
to seize property for the common good, this would seem to presuppose a
superior claim on his part. Hence “eminent domain” has come to be used
(rather confusingly) as both an act and as the under­lying form of title that
justifies that act. But how did the sovereign acquire that title in the first
place?
One answer to this question was provided by vari­ous feudal theories of
title hierarchy. In this framework, the sovereign holds a special right of expropriation ­because his title has priority, in both senses of the term: it was
both older and superior. In his famous compendium of En­glish common
law (1765–79), William Blackstone summarized the feudal framework in
the following way: “that the king is the universal lord and original proprietor of all the lands in his kingdom; and that no man doth or can possess
any part of it, but what has mediately or immediately been derived as a
gift from him, to be held upon feodal ser­vices.”5 Claims of this sort appear
to have been strongest in medieval and early modern France, as well as on
the Iberian Peninsula, where expropriation was justified as an exercise of
seigniorial power.6 In a dif­fer­ent idiom, this was part of Robert Filmer’s
defense of absolutist monarchy in E
­ ngland, famously pilloried by Locke in
The Two Treatises.

18

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Within ­these rather expansive theories of expropriation, special attention was paid to the m
­ atter of “originary title,” that is, the question of how
one could acquire a proprietary interest in something that had no previous owner, for which ­there was no prior claimant.7 In medieval and early
modern Eu­ro­pean jurisprudence, this came to be known as the prob­lem of
res nullius.8 Standing b­ ehind this concept is a relatively ­simple intuition:
an object with no prior owner becomes the property of she who takes control over it first, who is said to have a right of preemption. Partially through
the Roman revival, the idea that “preemptive acquisition” was a qualitatively
distinct form of proprietary claim entered into Eu­ro­pean civil and canon
law. Explaining and justifying this distinct moment was impor­tant, it was
thought, ­because all subsequent property claims w
­ ere derivative of this
“originary” moment. The m
­ atter touched upon very g­ rand theoretical questions, such as how h
­ umans could come to assert legitimate private property
claims in an originally common inheritance (from God), even absent “any
express Compact of all the Commoners” (as Locke put it),9 but the m
­ atter
was also put to very practical purposes. In the early modern En­glish context, for instance, it validated novel acquisition over previously unclaimed
or unused lands (for instance, by the draining of swamps). So the question
of “originary possession” served a dual function, as part of a narrative about
the origins of civil society and property per se and as a topical and practical intervention into the property relations of the pre­sent. In this context,
concepts of expropriation emerged as a means of explaining the sovereign’s
prerogative to forcibly appropriate property and assets from subjects. The
sovereign had a right of expropriation ­because he or she was the rightful
inheritor of the originary possession of the land.
Grotius’s theory of eminent domain was motivated in part by a desire
to displace this feudal theory of original possession. For him, although the
sovereign still possessed a special right of expropriation, this had to be justified on dif­fer­ent grounds. Rather than a seigniorial power, eminent domain
was part of a contractualist, del­e­ga­tion theory of sovereignty. The sovereign
holds the right to seize assets for the public good not in virtue of personally possessing a superior title but rather in light of his being empowered to
adjudicate and legislate over the common good. Eminent domain was an
extension of governmental authority, exercised on behalf of subjects who
held an equiprimordial natu­ral right to property. Among other contributions, this theory provided an in­de­pen­dent normative benchmark by which
to distinguish legitimate from illegitimate forms of expropriation. Subjects

that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

19

­ ere empowered to ask w
w
­ hether any par­tic­u­lar exercise of expropriation or
eminent domain was authentically undertaken for the common good.
Eminent domain remained for several centuries a relatively minor
language of property seizure. It was used by a host of ­legal and po­liti­cal
theorists—­from Pufendorf to Emer de Vattel and Denis Diderot—­but
never became the dominant idiom, least of all in En­glish.10 This changed
in the latter half of the eigh­teenth ­century, however. At that point, Anglo settler elites in British North Amer­i­ca ­were searching for intellectual resources
that might help them in their bid for greater autonomy from imperial London. As a result, they reached for continental Eu­ro­pean theorists who had
been relatively overlooked in Britain. The result was that the language of
“eminent domain” entered into ­legal and po­liti­cal theory of Anglo-­America
and, to this day, remains the dominant way to express the idea of compulsory seizure of private assets for the public good in the United States (unlike in ­Great Britain, where it still has ­little traction).11
Anglo-­American thought of this period is driven in no small part by
a desire to defend the power of eminent domain on more purely liberal-­
Lockean grounds; that is, the sovereign holds this power only ­because he
is acting as a representative and executor of the common ­will. One way to
establish ­these liberal bona fides was to exaggerate the distinction between
modern, liberal notions of eminent domain and Roman, medieval, or early
modern feudal conceptions of expropriation. The standard form of this
argument holds that, since the modern power of eminent domain is expressly about overriding individual private property interests, it cannot be
said to have existed ­until such interests ­were already recognized. Hence,
early American theorists of eminent domain commonly assert that, in this
technical sense, it did not exist “before the title of the individual property
owner as against the state was recognized and protected by law.” On this
basis, modern eminent domain can be differentiated from e­ arlier theories
of expropriation in which “the right to take land for public use was merged
in the general power of the government over all persons and property
within its jurisdiction.”12
­Under close inspection, however, this clean division does not hold up.
One way to render their overlap vis­i­ble is simply to note that, in the vast majority of cases, the sovereign right of expropriation carried a corresponding
duty to compensation. Across medieval and early modern Eu­rope, widespread convention held that subjects ­were owed fair recompense for their
sacrifices to the common good, however necessary these sacrifices might be.
This is tantamount to recognition that subjects, however “common” they
20

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

might be, held some valid proprietary interests that w
­ ere being overridden.
­Those whom a specific act of expropriation disadvantaged ­were, ­after all,
part of the collective in whose name it was being enacted. (One significant exception to this general rule was the case of expropriation as a form
of punishment, which is why confiscation remains a partially distinct term
of art.) In short, the general form of the argument across this period was
that sovereigns held a right to expropriate not predominantly ­because they
held ultimate and primordial title to the land but ­because they had a special
responsibility to care for the community as a ­whole and to rule for its common good.
This framework provided two normative benchmarks: expropriation
must be for the sake of the “common good” and attended by fair compensation. ­These two features are impor­tant ­because they also provide leverage for a critique of illegitimate expropriation. This is where our final term
enters the discussion, since dispossession has most often been used to mean
“unjust expropriation.” The con­temporary term can be traced backward
through the ­Middle En­glish disseisine to the Anglo-­Norman dessaisine (itself a variant of Old French). For many centuries, t­hese terms w
­ ere used
to name forms of wrongful seizure or removal. This was, in a literal sense,
a condition characterized by a deprivation of seizine, meaning possession
of land or chattel. The term has very old roots as well. For instance, in the
Magna Carta of 1215, section 39 states, “No f­ ree man ­shall be seized or imprisoned, or stripped of his rights or possessions, or outlawed or exiled, or
deprived of his standing in any other way, nor ­will be proceed with force
against him, or send o­ thers to do so, except by the lawful judgment of his
equals or by the law of the land.”13 In the original Latin, the first line is
“Nullus liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur aut disseisiatur.” Although
the term disseisiatur is sometimes rendered as “stripped,” it is more literally
“disseised” or, in modern En­glish, “dispossessed.” This etymological link
endured for many centuries in En­glish ­legal and po­liti­cal thought. It was
used by Hobbes in Leviathan (1651)14 and, much ­later, remained evident in
the 1833 Assize of novel disseisin, which dealt with recovering lands “recently
dispossessed” from the plaintiff.15
We have then a clutch of concepts: expropriation, confiscation, eminent
domain, and dispossession. Although overlapping, intersecting, and highly
mutable, when taken together ­these terms nevertheless compose a scene
regarding the shifting powers of property in the early modern Eu­ro­pean
world. Collectively, they express a dual desire: to name the legitimate right
of the sovereign (and his delegates) to seize property for the common good
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

21

and, conversely, to condemn the abuse of this power. Whereas eminent
domain is typically used only in ser­vice of the former positive sense, dispossession has more often operated in the latter, critical register. Most confusingly, expropriation has long been employed for both.

As I have already indicated, although each of t­hese terms refers initially
to a specific question of property acquisition, each is already implicated in
broader theories of po­liti­cal legitimacy. This became all the more explicit
as the concept of dispossession was expanded and radicalized in the late
eigh­teenth and early nineteenth centuries. This is an impor­tant period in the
story that occupies our primary concern h
­ ere ­because it was at this point
that it became pos­si­ble to argue not simply that the sovereign had performed a specific act of illegitimate property seizure but that sovereignty
was itself the effect of a massive act of “unjust expropriation.”16
The entry point for this expanded notion of dispossession was the central role that strug­gles over land tenure held in the context of revolts against
feudalism. Rising republicanism of the mid to late eigh­teenth ­century led
to an increased concern with delegitimizing the very idea of a permanent
landed aristocracy. In the ser­vice of this critique, republican thinkers
reached back to a rich (albeit quasi-­mythological) Greco-­Roman tradition,
which placed g­ reat emphasis on the virtues of fixed agricultural property,
not only for the property holders but also for the po­liti­cal community as
a ­whole. Fixed agricultural holdings, especially when held in small units
by in­de­pen­dent farmers, ­were thought to be the fount of republican excellence. Such farmers ­were relatively autonomous in both a material and
ethical sense: their unmediated access to land could provide them not only
basic subsistence but also a medium for virtuous l­ abor. Modern republicanism could critique feudalism on the basis of its perversion of this relationship, since the majority of landholders ­were no longer in­de­pen­dent farmers
but proprietors of large estates funded by rent. This concern is quite clear
in the analy­sis of Jean-­Jacques Rousseau, for instance, who was most critical
of the kind of large landholdings that formed the foundation of the Eu­
ro­pean nobility; but, as we ­shall see, it can also be seen in a host of l­ater
anarchist and utopian socialist thinkers, from Marx to con­temporary critical theory.17 So, although such questions entered into early modern Eu­ro­
pean ­legal and po­liti­cal thought as an extension of very general and abstract
questions about property as such, they soon came to function as tools in an
urgent con­temporary po­liti­cal strug­gle.
22

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

In this, the emphasis shifted from criticizing this or that par­tic­u­lar act of
unjust expropriation (e.g., as implausibly for the sake of the common good)
­toward a critique of feudal aristocratic rule as itself founded upon a massive
act of dispossession. ­Because the language of expropriation had long been
entangled in debates over the origins of property as such, many of t­hose
who would ­later seek to use it as a critical weapon against the feudal estates
backdated the event of dispossession to “time-­immemorial” and the first
moment of property formation. They therefore did not necessarily view the
landed aristocrats of their own time as the primary agents of expropriation
but rather as the inheritors of an original injustice, which had taken place
in some long-­distant past. This is most clear in the words of Rousseau, who
famously claimed:
The first man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, to whom it occurred to say this is mine, and found p­ eople sufficiently s­ imple to believe
him, was the true founder of civil society. How many crimes, wars, murders, how many miseries and horrors Mankind would have been spared
by him who, pulling up the stakes or filling in the ditch, had cried out to
his kind: Beware of listening to this imposter; You are lost if you forget
that the fruits are every­one’s and the Earth no one’s.18
The fact that Rousseau bound the origins of civil society together so tightly
with this quasi-­mythological original expropriation meant that his argument generated divergent and contradictory responses. Some, such as many
anarchists of the nineteenth ­century, called for the radical restructuring of
state and society through the total abolition of actually existing property
relations. ­Others contended that, precisely b­ ecause ­human society as such
was so tightly bound to an original expropriative act, the institutions of
feudal tenure must be defended on the basis that abolition would entail
the unraveling of civilization itself. A third position equivocated, calling
for more moderate reform of existing institutions, accompanied by complex
schemes that might compensate the rural peasantry, who, in their eyes, ­were
the inheritors of the original dispossessed.
Thomas Paine’s rather overlooked work “Agrarian Justice” (1797) is an
illustrative case of the latter position.19 In it, Paine argued that ­there was
no natu­ral or original case of “property in land,” an institution that, for
instance, he thought absent from biblical socie­ties. This changed with the
advancement of cultivation. Cultivation permitted individuals to improve
the land in such a way that it came to be transformed far beyond its original
state. Th
­ ose improvements ­were sown back into the earth, producing further
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

23

increases in productivity. This generated inequalities, which eventually
congealed into landed aristocracy. In one of the first instances of the En­
glish term being used in ­these debates, Paine claimed that the resulting land
mono­poly had “dispossessed more than half the inhabitants of ­every nation
of their natu­ral inheritance, without providing for them, as ­ought to have
been done, as an indemnification for that loss, and has thereby created a
species of poverty and wrechedness [sic] that did not exist before.”20
As one can see, ­there are in fact two normative concerns operating within
Paine’s account. He is concerned, first, with the original moment of dispossession as intrinsically objectionable. As Paine puts it, in nature ­there is “no
such t­hing as landed property.” Th
­ ose who first claimed it had “no right
to locate as [their] property in perpetuity any part” of the land.21 Second,
this original act of theft enabled a set of resultant evils, namely, widespread
poverty among the decedents of the original dispossessed. So, for Paine,
dispossession was objectionable both intrinsically and consequentially.
“Agrarian Justice” was written while Paine was living in the midst of
revolutionary France. He had at this point already served in the French National Assembly and had gone through a trial that nearly led to his execution. The text came out of a set of proposals he wrote at the time arguing in
­favor of a basic inheritance right, which he framed as compensation for the
effective exclusion of the masses from the owner­ship of land. It was part of
a reformist agenda that sought to bridge radical and conservative positions.
For Paine, although the aristocracy had certainly taken advantage of its
mono­poly privilege, current holders of land titles w
­ ere not themselves directly responsible for the context itself, in ­either a moral or ­legal sense. “The
fault,” as he put it, “is not in the pre­sent possessors. . . . ​The fault is in the
system, and it has stolen imperceptibly upon the world, aided afterwards by
the Agrarian law of the sword.” The key then was to transform the under­
lying system of owner­ship, ideally “without diminishing or deranging the
property of any of the pre­sent possessors,” a pro­cess that might require “successive generations.”22 Paine’s proposed solution was a new taxation system
that would serve a compensatory and redistributive function, providing indemnification to the dispossessed for their regrettable, albeit unavoidable,
historic loss. This general compensatory approach to the exclusion of the
rural poor from landholding enjoyed significant support in the eigh­teenth
and early nineteenth centuries. It played a role in utopian socialist proj­ects
aimed at giving the poor opportunities to return to agrarian living or, failing
that, to receive support in the form of Poor Law re­distributions. In ­Great
Britain, it eventually led to the Return of O
­ wners of Land (1873), a modern
24

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

“Doomsday book” proj­ect that sought to document the concentration of
aristocratic land owner­ship in that country.23 As s­ hall be discussed at length
in the sections to come, it also played a role in the justification of settler
colonization schemes abroad, which held out similar promises of return to
in­de­pen­dent self-­rule through individualized landholding, perhaps finding
its purest theoretical advocate in Thomas Jefferson.
Debates of this sort reached something of a zenith in the classical anarchism of the mid to late nineteenth ­century. At that time, several prominent thinkers (including Pierre-­Joseph Prou­dhon and Peter Kropotkin)
advanced the claim that modern Eu­ro­pean nation-­states ­were the emanations of acts of massive theft, specifically the theft of land from the rural
peasantry. As Prou­dhon put it at that time: “Through the land the plundering of man began, and in the land it has rooted its foundations. The land
is the fortress of the modern cap­i­tal­ist, as it was the citadel of feudalism,
and of the ancient patriciate. Fi­nally, it is the land which gives authority to
the government princi­ple, an ever-­renewed strength, whenever the popu­lar
Hercules overthrows the ­giant.”24 As we can see ­here, like Rousseau, ­these
thinkers envisioned the original partition of the earth to constitute an ancient violation, a “plundering.” And, like Paine, they ­were attentive to its
con­temporary ramifications. Unlike liberals such as Paine, however, they
drew a more radical conclusion, expressly repudiating the notion that dispossession could be remedied “without diminishing or deranging the property of any of the pre­sent possessors.” Instead, they concluded that modern
property relations ­were illegitimate in a more general sense, since other
forms of in­equality ­were derivative of the originary seizure of communal
land. Hence, the famous slogan of nineteenth-­century anarchists: Property is theft! 25 In this, terms such as expropriation came to play an increasingly impor­tant role in naming this ongoing, structured theft. By the end
of the nineteenth ­century, the term had expanded and radicalized to the
point that Kropotkin could worry only of “not ­going far enough,” that is,
of “carry­ing out expropriation on too small a scale to be lasting.” Instead, he
argued in his 1892 text, The Conquest of Bread, that “expropriation should
be general,” equating it with “a universal rising.”26
In sum, then, the concept of expropriation entered into Eu­ro­pean ­legal
and po­liti­cal thought as a means to stabilize and legitimize extant power
relations and sovereign authority. It was, however, si­mul­ta­neously inverted
and redeployed as a tool of social criticism, that is, to destabilize and transform power and property. In this, it was joined to a host of other concepts,
most notably dispossession and eminent domain. ­There is a discernable
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

25

shift in the transition from early modern to late modern Eu­ro­pean thought
(from roughly the early seventeenth ­century to the late nineteenth), in
which the terms came increasingly to be freed from their original uses and
set to new, more radical and critical purposes. Eventually, it became pos­
si­ble and even plausible to use t­ hese as terms in the condemnation of established property relations rather than in their vindication. Perhaps most
dramatically, it was eventually pos­si­ble to accuse the sovereign not merely
of a specific act of illegitimate expropriation but of himself being the effect of
a prior dispossession: the sovereign as thief.
Marx represents something of a turning point in this critical history.
Although initially impressed by the anarchist critique,27 Marx eventually
came to view this analy­sis as inadequate and improperly formulated. By
positing that classical, feudal, and modern forms of domination all emanated from the same fount (i.e., land appropriation), anarchists generated a
falsely abstract and ahistorical conception of “expropriation,” one that failed
to grasp the specificity of modernity and capitalism. Moreover, in hitching their critique to the language of theft, they had ­adopted a restrictively
­legal and moralistic category, one that in fact presupposed and naturalized
a similarly abstract and ahistorical conception of property. For Marx, the
anarchist slogan “Property is theft!” was therefore self-­refuting, since the
concept of theft presupposes the existence of property.28 Even before Marx
arrived at this conclusion, Max Stirner made a similar observation. In his
major work, The Ego and Its Own (1844), he wrote: “Is the concept of ‘theft’
at all pos­si­ble ­unless one allows validity to the concept ‘property’? How can
one steal if property is not already extant? What belongs to no one cannot be
stolen; the ­water that one draws out of the sea he does not steal. Accordingly
property is not theft, but a theft becomes pos­si­ble only through property.”29
In effect, t­hese critics w
­ ere pointing out that property must be logically,
chronologically, and normatively prior to theft. The latter cannot be foundational to ­either property relations or civil society more generally.
In the shuttling back and forth between anarchist and Marxist positions
on the question of property and theft, we can observe an in­ter­est­ing correlate movement of conceptual and linguistic translation. Within classical
anarchism, the French term expropriation came to function as a placeholder
for the pro­cesses of large-­scale “theft” that w
­ ere viewed as constitutive of
the modern state system itself. When Marx engaged ­these debates, he used
both the Germanic term Enteignung and the Latinate Expropriation, somewhat inconsistently.30 Fi­nally, and somewhat confusingly, when Das Kapital
was translated into En­g lish, the relevant terms w
­ ere often, but incon26

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

sistently, rendered as dispossession (sometimes used interchangeably with
expropriation, sometimes as distinct). From this point on, the latter term
enters English-­speaking debates and now enjoys wide circulation across
a variety of critical traditions and thinkers, from David Harvey to Judith
Butler.
As ­these key terms ­were translated linguistically, so too ­were they renovated conceptually. Anarchist thinkers had posited that the seizure of communal lands was itself a vio­lence committed against the feudal peasantry by
the aristocratic nobility, and that this was essentially theft: it was a coercive
and illegitimate transfer of property from the original ­owners. Although
Marx continued to speak of Expropriation and Enteignung, he changed the
meaning of ­these terms when he provided a more abstract definition. For
him, dispossession came to refer to the initial “separation-­process” (Scheidungsprozeß ) that separated “immediate producers” from direct access to the
means of production, thus forcing them into new ­labor conditions, now
mediated by way of the wage.31 This implied a conceptual shift away from
viewing dispossession in terms of “theft,” strictly speaking. Whereas the
original anarchist argument presented the rural peasantry as the original
“­owners” of the land, Marx sought to shear this critique from its normative
investment in property.
In the next chapter, we w
­ ill unpack the logic of Marx’s engagement
with the concepts of expropriation and dispossession in greater detail. For
now, it suffices to highlight two results of this broader critique of anarchist
thought. First, ­these categories ­were slowly displaced as tools of radical
politics, becoming narrowly legalistic terms. The expansive normative and
critical sense with which Rousseau, Paine, or Prou­dhon spoke of dispossession, for instance, was collapsed into the e­arlier, more technical and
legalistic categories of expropriation and eminent domain with which we
are familiar t­oday (serving now, somewhat ironically, to legitimate state
seizure of private property). Second, insofar as the category did persist as
a tool of social criticism, it was subsumed beneath other, more fundamental concepts.32 The historical result of this has been that, within the more
Marxian-­inspired lineages of critical theory, the question of dispossession
has been subordinated to other concerns, specifically its role in generating
a class of proletarianized workers. In terms of a historical-­descriptive narrative, dispossession moves from being a story of “originary theft” ­toward
a more localized claim about the rise of the modern capital relation. In the
terms of normative theory, it loses any sense of its intrinsic injustice,
and is instead rendered objectionable only in terms of its consequences,
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

27

s­ pecifically the way it enables exploitation and/or class domination (points
to which I ­will return).

II
The concept of dispossession has enjoyed a re­nais­sance of sorts. As was outlined in the introduction, it has come to be seen as a useful analytic device
in con­temporary debates surrounding colonialism (in both its historical
and present-­day manifestations), particularly in the Anglo settler world.
In this new usage, echoes may be heard of the previous intra-­European
debates sketched above. Most obviously, in its deployment by Indigenous
­peoples, dispossession retains connotations of “land theft” long associated
with strug­gles against Eu­ro­pean feudalism, albeit transposed now to name
the specific territorial acquisition logic of settler colonization. However,
as is hopefully clear by now, when the term dispossession migrates into discussions on colonization, a certain danger emerges. On the one hand, it
is potentially problematic to adopt the classical anarchist strategy of construing dispossession as a case of straightforward theft since this leaves one
vulnerable to both traditional objections from the Marxian camp and more
opportunistic critiques from the right (discussed in the introduction). On
the other hand, however, the route provided by the Marxist reply to anarchism may also prove inadequate, since this drags the heart of the ­whole
­matter away from expropriation ­toward exploitation. It would seem very
odd indeed to suggest that the dispossession of Indigenous p­ eoples from
their lands is problematic ­because it enables their exploitation as laborers,
since this is empirically not a very accurate description of the experience of
colonization faced by many Indigenous ­peoples (especially in the Anglo
settler world), but more to the point, it seems to distort the under­lying
logic of ­these strug­gles.
I contend that this dilemma is a function of the paucity of historical reconstructive work of the a­ ctual institutions of landed property in the Anglo
settler world and their impact on the development of Indigenous traditions
of re­sis­tance and critique. In short, we must understand more precisely how
landed property came to function as a tool of colonial domination in such a
way as to generate a unique “dilemma of dispossession,” which is not reducible to the one experienced by Eu­ro­pean radicals.
Before turning to that alternative genealogy, however, it is impor­tant
to note that, just as the term had a complex variety of uses and proximate
28

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

terms in the Eu­ro­pean debates, so too it does in this (colonial) context.
Indeed, an alternative route around the above dilemma is to point out that,
for many Indigenous ­peoples, dispossession is not ­really about possession at
all. In this strategy, although the word is used to describe something specific
about the territoriality of Indigenous social and po­liti­cal ­orders or its role
in settler colonization, the “possessive” part of dispossession is rendered
rather more incidental. In this case, we might ­really mean something like
deracination or desecration. The first of ­these terms denotes a form of “uprooting” and carries connotations of displacement and removal. It can have
literal and more meta­phorical uses (as is the case with, say, dislocation) and
has a certain intuitive appeal since the expropriation of the territorial foundation of a society ­will clearly have a massively negative, disruptive effect
on that society. Dispossession qua deracination carries its own ambiguities
and dangers, of course. It may, for instance, suture indigeneity to territorial
fixity, an issue I ­will not explore ­here.33 However, the language of deracination does seem at least to lead us away from implying that that relationship
to land must in its original form be a propertied one.
At other times when ­people use the term dispossession in ­these contexts,
they seem to r­ eally mean something like desecration. In this valence, Indigenous ­peoples often raise a concern with the degradation or defilement of
some object of concern whose moral worth cannot be mea­sured in purely
anthropocentric terms. What is in­ter­est­ing about this framework is that the
primary object of injury has changed. Whereas deracination, theft, exploitation, and coercion are all ­things that happen to the ­human inhabitants as
a result of land appropriation, desecration implies that the Earth itself is the
injured party. This is not to say that ­there cannot be some additional injury
to the ­human inhabitants, but this shifts to the level of a secondary effect.
Consider the following passage from the Mohawk ­legal scholar Patricia
Monture-­Angus:
Although Aboriginal ­Peoples maintain a close relationship with the
land . . . ​it is not about control of the land. . . . ​Earth is ­mother and
she nurtures us all. . . . ​Sovereignty, when defined as my right to be
­responsible . . . ​requires a relationship with territory (and not a relationship based on control of that territory). . . . ​What must be understood
then is that Aboriginal request to have our sovereignty respected is
­really a request to be responsible. I do not know of anywhere e­ lse in
history where a group of p­ eople have had to fight so hard just to be
responsible.34
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

29

What is motivating about this rendering is the novel way in which the
claims and relationships ­here have been reversed from the standard proprietary model. Monture-­Angus provides us with a clear example of an argument that does not rest on a normative commitment to property in land
but still leverages a strong critique of territorial acquisition. The impor­tant
ele­ment is that she has converted a traditionally rights-­based claim into a
duty-­based one. As she construes it, Aboriginal title is a claim about the
necessity of being responsible to something greater than oneself, that is,
the Earth itself. This seems to get us out of some of the complications of the
strictly proprietary use of dispossession and brings us closer to the desecration sense of the term.
I explore t­ hese alternative formulations in greater detail in ­later chapters.35
Let us set them aside for the moment, however, in order to give our original problematic a more thorough treatment. If I do so, it is not ­because
the rendering given by thinkers such as Monture-­Angus is not impor­tant
or convincing. Rather, we may wish to explore alternatives ­because, for instance, not all Indigenous ­peoples and communities ­will view their relationship to the Earth in this way. What is more, as any engagement with
the a­ ctual writings and works of such ­people reveals, ­there is a palpable
sense in which Indigenous communities in the Anglo settler world have
experienced, and continue to experience, colonization as a form of theft.
Notwithstanding all the complications just raised, then, t­ here is a certain
claim ­here to the effect that this land is stolen, a claim that cannot be simply
sidestepped if we wish to remain responsive to the specific historical experience at stake. We may wish then to persist in grappling with the language
of theft out of an interest in engaging ­these claims as they are presented to
us, perhaps precisely b­ ecause the issue at hand does not fit neatly into expected frames of reference. Continuing to speak of dispossession qua “theft
of land” would then not simply be impor­tant as part of a rhetorical strategy,
or as a princi­ple of solidarity (although t­ hese may also be impor­tant considerations). Rather, it would be worth retaining ­these terms ­because they in
fact express an appropriate and conceptually complex apprehension of the
nature of prob­lem at hand.
Part of what continues to motivate the use of the term dispossession in
­these contexts, I contend, is the real sense that colonization (especially
settler colonization) does involve a unique species of theft for which we
do not always have adequate language. First, dispossession of this sort
combines two pro­cesses typically thought distinct: it transforms nonproprietary relations into proprietary ones while, at the same time, systemati30

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

cally transferring control and title of this (newly formed) property. It is
thus not (only) about the transfer of property but the transformation into
property. In this way, dispossession creates an object in the very act of appropriating it.
How exactly does this work? How can dispossession be said to fuse the
making and taking of property? The answer depends on clarifying what it
means to “make” property. Part of the confusion around this derives from
the per­sis­tent ambiguity in the ordinary language sense of property. Most
of the time, when we speak of our “property,” we think of a collection of
objects: cars, ­houses, clothing, and the like. However, as almost all critical-­
theoretical treatments of the category begin by reminding us, in point of
fact, property does not refer to a set of ­things. Rather, it refers to a species
of relations.36 To claim property in something is, in effect, to construct a relationship with ­others, namely, a relation of exclusion. Most often, to assert
property in something is to make an enforceable claim to exclude someone
from access to some ­thing. The fact that property is ­really a form of social
relation (and not a par­tic­u­lar kind of object) is made most dramatically vis­
i­ble when we consider that ­there need not be any physical tangible entity
in which the claim is lodged. You can have property in an idea, a technique
for ­doing something, even an expectation. The object in which you have a
claim need not be, therefore, a physical entity. But it must be cognizable as
a distinct juridical object, something that can in princi­ple be rendered the
repository of an enforceable claim against o­ thers. So “making” property
refers not to the creation of a new material object but to a new juridical and
conceptual object—an abstraction—­that serves to anchor relations, rights,
and, ultimately, power.
In this context we are concerned with how “land” was rendered as
“property.” Although it may first appear as a perfectly obvious, empirical
object, “land” is in fact a concept, and a highly abstract one at that.37 We are
essentially talking about taking a portion of the Earth’s surface—­excluding
the subsurface and troposphere beyond some often vaguely formulated or
unspecified distance—­and bundling a complex diversity of proprietary
claims within it such that a person could, in princi­ple, acquire control over
all objects and activities within that zone. As a ­legal and marketable object
of this sort, land in this sense is a highly culturally and historically specific
object in which one could invest property claims. It is not the case that all
socie­ties—­even most socie­ties—­have had such a concept, let alone a set
of ­legal and po­liti­cal institutions to enforce claims around it, or a market
through which it could be traded.
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

31

As we ­shall see in periodic historical reconstructions throughout this
book, when Eu­ro­pean colonizers encountered the diverse socie­ties of the
so-­called New World, they frequently found that Indigenous p­ eoples had
no conception of land in this abstract and narrow sense. (Rather than viewing this in terms of a s­ imple lack, many Indigenous thinkers have considered it a positive feature of their socie­ties that they did not partition Earth
in this manner.38) Accordingly, the pro­cess of dispossessing them entailed a
rather complex gesture of ascribing this peculiar property form to them but
in such a way as to facilitate its divestiture. Put more generally, we can say
that dispossession is a pro­cess in which novel proprietary relations are generated but ­under structural conditions that demand their simultaneous negation. Th
­ ose impacted by this process—­the dispossessed—­may even come
to attach to t­ hese new relations, experiencing them (or ele­ments of them)
as a positive development in the sense that the pro­cess entails a nominal
expansion of their proprietary rights; that is, they have gained a new form
of property (in this case, “land”). However, they can also come to experience a deep conflict between the abstract form of the proprietary right and
the conditions for its realization. The reason for this is that the dispossessive pro­cess has also changed background social conditions such that the
actualization of the proprietary right in question is necessarily mediated in
such a way as to effectively negate it. In effect, the dispossessed may come to
“have” something they cannot use, except by alienating it to another.
This formulation helps explain the paradoxical phenomenon we find in
the history of settler colonialism of colonizers who si­mul­ta­neously affirm
and deny Indigenous proprietary interests in land. In the long and complex history of the Eu­ro­pean colonization of the (now) Anglo settler world,
we of course find numerous examples of colonial figures who simply deny
outright the very possibility of Indigenous property in land, typically as a
function of Indigenous p­ eoples’ supposedly lower levels of socioeconomic
development, rationality, techniques of cultivation, enclosure, and the like.
As has been well documented, thinkers from Vattel to Locke to Immanuel
Kant have all doubted ­whether Indigenous ­peoples have ever had the
socioeconomic and technological development required to truly take possession of land. Alongside t­ hese blanket denials, however, we also find vari­
ous forms of partial recognition and selective affirmation of Indigenous
proprietary interests. Historically, settlers have routinely affirmed certain
forms of Indigenous property rights ­because they have recognized that, in
a consolidating colonial-­capitalist context, Indigenous p­ eoples can only
actualize their property rights through alienation.39 The Lakota (Standing
32

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Rock Sioux) phi­los­o­pher Vine Deloria Jr. pointedly summarizes this feature of dispossession in his landmark 1969 work, Custer Died for Your Sins.
One day the white man discovered that the Indian tribes still owned
some 135 million acres of land. To his horror he learned that much of
it was very valuable. . . . ​Animals could be herded together on a piece
of land, but they could not sell it. Therefore it took no time at all to
discover that Indians w
­ ere ­really ­people and should have the right to sell
their lands. Land was the means of recognizing the Indian as a ­human
being. It was the method whereby land could be stolen legally and not
blatantly. . . . ​Discovery negated the rights of the Indian tribes to sovereignty and equality among the nations of the world. It took away their
title to their land and gave them the right only to sell.40
Deloria is putting his fin­ger ­here on a peculiar nominal or “negative property” right enjoyed by Indigenous ­peoples in colonial contexts: the right
“only to sell.” In phrasing m
­ atters this way, Deloria is drawing upon a long
and rich heritage (discussed at greater length in chapter 3). Above all, he
lays bare the specific mechanics of dispossession, whereby Indigenous property is only cognizable by Western law in and through its alienation.
It serves to recall that the standard form of a property right is a tripartite conjunction of exclusive rights to acquisition, use and enjoyment, and
alienation.41 In the context of evolving forms of settler colonial capitalism,
however, the structure of “Indigenous property” emerged as an already
paradoxical conjunction, a truncated form of property that could only be
fully expressed in the third moment, that is, alienation. In other words, it is
fully realized only in its negation. This is what Deloria is pointing to in saying that “Indians” have only a “right to sell.” In this case, Indigenous ­peoples
are not fully excluded from holding property per se but instead have come
to possess an empty or truncated proprietary interest, one that cannot be
actualized except through divestment.
This is why the claims of Indigenous p­ eoples may appear question-­
begging from our standpoint in the pre­sent. Indigenous ­peoples are figured
as the “original o­ wners of the land” but only retroactively, that is, refracted
backward through the pro­cess itself. In this case, then, Indigenous original
propertied interests in this object called “land” are only rendered cognizable in a retrospective moment, viewed backward and refracted through
the pro­cess of generating a distinct form of “structurally negated” property
right in it. The original proprietary interest is only vis­i­ble ­after it has been
lost. Viewed in this way, Indigenous claims to the land are not mistaken
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

33

or confused at all but rather reflect the paradoxical fact that, in this context, possession does not precede dispossession but is its effect. Rather than
avoid the prob­lem of a negatively defined concept, we should therefore
highlight precisely the recursive logic at work ­here as the essential feature of
the specific pro­cess ­under consideration.
In sum, the recursive movement at work h
­ ere may be plotted as one of
transformation (making), transference (taking), and retroactive attribution
(belated ascribing). When worked out in relation to this specific context,
this reformulated conception helps us avoid some of the false dilemmas
sketched above since it can name a pro­cess of dispossession without presuming an original possession or requiring a theory of “first occupancy.”
Contrary to Stirner’s direct assertion, what belongs to no one can in fact
be stolen. It is to the long and sordid history of this peculiar mode of theft
that Indigenous authors and activists are referring when they employ the
language of dispossession ­today.42
Ultimately, however, if we are to conceive of dispossession as consisting
in a relationship between a juridical structure of right and the social context that actualizes that system of right in a “negative” manner, we cannot
remain at the level of theoretical assertion. It must be demonstrated, not
stipulated. A full account w
­ ill need to explain both that de jure structure
and its de facto actualization. We ­will need to demonstrate precisely how
proprietary interests can be “structurally negated” by a background social
context. It is to this background horizon that we now turn.

III
Settler colonialism in the Anglophone world has always been inextricably
linked to a transformation in ­human relations to land. The eventual “rise of
the Anglosphere”—­particularly dramatic in the nineteenth ­century—­was
a “metaphysical revolution.”43 In and through this pro­cess, land came to be
understood as something that could be not only individuated in mea­sured,
discrete units but also abstracted and registered in ­legal codes that could
be circulated, traded, and pledged. As t­hese ciphers w
­ ere or­ga­nized into
a “market,” their relation to the ­actual physical spaces they ­were meant
to represent was increasingly attenuated. As historian John Weaver puts
it, “By an astonishing conceptual revolution, worked out in both old-­and
new-­world settings, the most tangible and non-­moveable property conceivable was or­ga­nized into interests and condensed into paper assets that, in
34

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

good market conditions, could be cycled quickly from person to person,
person to corporation, corporation to corporation, corporation to person,
and so on.”44 This was a pro­cess that took place in both “old” and “new” world
settings, in Eu­rope and its colonies. It was part of the global pro­cess that
Karl Polanyi theorized as the “­Great Transformation,” which he linked
(albeit in peripheral ways) to colonization.45 What makes the Anglo settler
colonial world such a unique and impor­tant lens through which to study
this, however, is that it was a space where state formation and market formation not only took place si­mul­ta­neously—­the emergence of a modern
­legal, governmental apparatus was coeval with the emergence of a market
in land—­but also that this was done in explicit opposition to Indigenous
forms of life that presented radically distinct and divergent visions of the
relationship between ­human socie­ties and the lands on which they lived.
Thus, the structure of property in land that took hold in the Anglo settler
world was systematically oriented ­toward the dispossession of Indigenous
­peoples in a unique and noncontingent manner.46
That Anglo settler colonialism is inextricably linked to the emergence of
a market in land is most obviously true in the case of the United States. As
one con­temporary economist rather unapologetically boasts: “Amer­i­ca has
always been a nation of real estate speculators. . . . ​Real estate speculation
was an integral part of the ‘winning of the west,’ the construction of our
cities, and the transformation of American home life, from tenements to
mini-­mansions.”47 In one sense, this is correct. Many of the leading figures
of the American Revolution made their fortunes in real estate speculation.
They specialized in acquiring vast swaths of land from a public entity (originally from the Crown), parceling it out and selling it to smaller investors
at large profits. This group included George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson but also lesser-­known figures such as Robert
Morris, Nathaniel Phelps, Oliver Gorham, and other influential financiers
of the revolutionary period. Through land speculation companies such as
the Ohio Com­pany, the Vandalia Com­pany, and the Loyal Land Com­pany
before it, the Anglo settler elite of the eigh­teenth and nineteenth centuries
was built upon the commercial trade in land.48
­There ­were huge amounts of money to be made in the earliest rounds
of land acquisition and sale. In the early 1790s, Alexander Hamilton estimated that 30 cents per acre was a fair price for government frontier land.
Only a few short years ­later, the 1796 congress considered a $2 minimum
sale price to be reasonable.49 By 1850 New York State land was valued
at $29 per acre. Adjusted to con­temporary prices, that is a change from
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

35

a­ pproximately $7.50 to $35 to $854 in sixty years.50 The role of government was to regulate and control the pace of expansion so as to prevent the
formation of real estate b­ ubbles, which could cause recessions when they
burst. Periodic real estate collapses did, of course, bankrupt many (including Robert Morris, who was imprisoned for his debts in 1798) and by 1819
left an estimated $21 million owed to the federal government from defunct
land speculators, approximately $12 million of which was linked to the
newly opened Alabama territory alone.51 The U.S. government responded
with a variety of relief mea­sures, including releasing new forms of credit
available for the purchase of public land.52 The most impor­tant credit policy of the boom period between 1797 and 1819 was the Land Act of 1800,
which enabled purchasers to acquire public land by fronting a mere one-­
twentieth of the initial cost.53
The ­great Chicago land boom and bust of the 1830s and 1840s is often
held up as an exemplary case of the general pattern of U.S. westward expansion through speculation. In the 1820s, t­here was virtually no market for
land in that area of the frontier, and thus land was effectively worthless as
a commodity.54 By 1830 it was some of the most expensive real estate on
the continent and, by one estimate, increased by nearly 40,000 ­percent in
that de­cade alone.55 In 1840 a partial collapse of this b­ ubble generated a
wave of foreclosures by the Bank of Illinois, which itself promptly declared
bankruptcy in 1842.56 In the thirty years following the initial land boom,
Chicago’s population went from a few hundred to approximately 109,000
inhabitants. In the next thirty years ­after stabilizing the land market, it repeatedly doubled, reaching 1.1 million by 1890.57
The Civil War did ­little to slow westward expansion. It was during this
period that Congress passed the Morrill Act, setting aside huge swaths of
newly acquired public lands for the establishment of a network of new
land grant universities, and the Pacific Railroad Act, which provided private companies with an estimated two hundred million acres of Indigenous
land, often in direct contravention of treaty obligations.58 Indigenous
­peoples w
­ ere slowly brought into the land market but only u­ nder highly
unequal terms, often through agreements that ­today would be recognized
as forms of predatory lending.59 For example, the Choctaws ­were forced
by such pressures to sell a majority of their lands for $50,000 in 1805. The
Chickasaws followed suit soon a­ fter, releasing all their land north of the Tennessee River for $20,000.60
Both the public and private sides of the new economic order w
­ ere
deeply enmeshed in the emerging land market. Private individuals could
36

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

make huge profits, but the federal government was also dependent on sales.
As Roxanne Dunbar-­Ortiz puts it, in the first few de­cades of U.S. in­de­pen­
dence, “land became the most impor­tant exchange commodity for the accumulation of capital and building of the national trea­sury.”61 This created
tensions between dif­fer­ent aspects of the state building pro­cess, that is, between territorial expansion, capital accumulation, and the rule of law. This
often played out in terms of competition between government agents (such
as surveyors, bureaucrats, and auctioneers), homesteading squatters, and
financier-­speculators, consideration of which necessarily engages broader
questions of how to theorize the relationship between state and capital
formation in settler colonial contexts. Th
­ ese dif­fer­ent agents had distinct
and often mutually conflicting immediate goals and objectives. However,
over long-­term cycles, they ­were nevertheless able to generate a certain resonance (even if not total consonance) between their dif­fer­ent proj­ects so as
to produce a relatively stable effect: dispossession.
Once set into motion, the dispossessive logic of settler colonization
proved difficult to control. Issuing a warning in the precise vocabulary with
which we are h
­ ere concerned, the secretary of war u­ nder George Washington, Henry Knox (no friend to Indigenous p­ eoples generally), argued
in 1789 that, ­because Indigenous ­peoples ­were prior occupants, they “possess the right of the soil. It cannot be taken from them ­unless by their ­free
consent, or by the right of conquest in case of a just war. To dispossess them
on any other princi­ple, would be a gross violation of the fundamental laws
of nature, and of that distributive justice which is the glory of a nation.”62
Echoing and concretizing this sentiment, in 1785 Congress issued a proclamation forbidding unlawful settlement and authorizing the secretary of war
to remove ­those in the breach.63 In 1806 the term squatter was used for the
first time in congressional debates to refer to the growing prob­lem of claims
obtained outside the formally recognized and legally sanctioned pro­cess.64
Formal, legislative prohibition peaked in the form of the Intrusion Act of
1807, which forbid U.S. citizens not only from unlawfully taking possession
or making settlements but also from surveying, designating bound­aries, or
even marking trees in such a way as to facilitate a f­ uture claim. It moreover
reauthorized the president and his officials “to employ such military force
as he may judge necessary and proper” to remove offenders.65
Congress faced two obstacles in its attempt to curtail settler expansion
by legislative means. First and foremost, legislative control over illegal squatting was practically unenforceable. By the early nineteenth ­century, settlers
had grown in numbers and technical competences to be an ­in­de­pen­dent
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

37

social force that could effectively overrun the state in its official capacity.
This was proven time and again as the new republic strug­gled to enforce
its frontier laws. Army officers ­were sent out to the countryside, charged
with handing out and collecting fines as well as enforcing foreclosures and
jail sentences. In July 1827, federal troops ­were sent into Indian land in Alabama, where they forcibly removed squatters, burning their homes and
crops. Repeated periodically throughout the 1830s and 1840s, this came to
be known as the “Intruders’ War.”66 Among other difficulties of enforcement, soldiers ­were generally sympathetic to squatters, not a surprise given
that cheap frontier land was a common reward for ser­vice.
The second prob­lem was more abstract. State mea­sures against intrusion
relied on a clear understanding of the legality of settlement for their consistent application and enforcement. H
­ ere we encounter a unique conceptual
prob­lem. Anglo settler states have historically faced a complicated gesture
of si­mul­ta­neously avowing and disavowing the rule of law, that is, of squaring their reliance on extralegal vio­lence as constitutive to their founding
and continued expansion with their self-­image as distinctly ­free socie­ties
governed by the rule of law. The distinction between legality and illegality
that operates in the land acquisition pro­cess of a settler state is particularly
fraught and unstable. It requires positing the state as the legitimate source
of law, while acknowledging, even fostering, the extralegal mechanisms
that make this pos­si­ble. On the one hand, the state is figured as the originator of law, which is meant to secure its validity and its distinctiveness from
other nonstate forms of coercion (which have not been publicly validated
and thus cannot avail themselves of the status of law). On the other hand,
the state itself must arise out of extralegal force, for t­ here is no prior law that
can validate founding itself; that is, to draw upon the language of Walter
Benjamin, a shift from law-­preserving to law-­positing vio­lence (rechtserhaltende to rechtsetzend Gewalt).67 In Anglo settler socie­ties, the solution to
this has often been to redeem the validity of founding through a recursive
mechanism, one that sees the state acting “as if ” it is a source of publicly
validated law ­until such time that it properly becomes one (a point on the
horizon that is, of course, ever receding). The state’s claim to a mono­poly
over legitimate vio­lence exhibits a performative quality: the assertion is an
act that works to make real­ity conform to the aspiration.
Consider the Intrusion Act of 1807, which expressly applied to squatters
on already acquired public lands, that is, illegal possession within the extant ambit of U.S. law. However, since squatters, by definition, do not observe the bounds of law, the act acknowledged that they w
­ ere also found
38

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

in land “not previously recognized and confirmed by the United States.”
­These ­were squatters beyond the territorial bounds of the United States
but nevertheless (and somewhat inexplicably) within the reach of the law.
The act equivocates then between two dif­fer­ent prob­lems. One way to
express this tension is through a distinction between illegality and extralegality. Whereas squatters on recognized and claimed U.S. public lands are
clearly located within a sphere of illegality—­itself readily cognizable and
justiciable by the law—­squatters beyond the territorial bounds of the extant state are in a space of extralegality. Their activities are “outside” U.S.
law but not necessarily in conflict with it. The slippage between ­these two
is vexing from a l­egal standpoint (for instance, as a prob­lem of justiciability)
yet especially productive and integral to the dispossessive pro­cess, since
the prohibition against squatting in lands “not yet recognized” as within
the bounds of the state presumptively figures ­these lands as awaiting incorporation, as potential but not yet fully actualized public lands. In this
way, the lands beyond the frontier are merely at a temporally ­earlier stage in
the recursive pro­cess of legitimation by which public lands came to be subsumed beneath settler state law, since even the territory from which the law
currently speaks (the settler metropole) is but a previous era’s quasi-­legal
frontier lands that have been retroactively validated. As such, we see judges
and jurists of early nineteenth-­century Amer­i­ca struggling with the issue
of frontier illegality not only as a prob­lem of enforcement but of law’s ultimate legitimacy. As one Mississippi federal judge complained in a letter to
President James Madison: “How can a jury be found in Monroe County to
convict a man of intrusion—­where ­every man is an intruder?”68
The solution to this was to incorporate a mea­sure of illegality into the
operation of the law, an illegality that, it was hoped, could be retroactively
redeemed through a recursive device. In the early nineteenth ­century, this
took the form of preemption. The word preemption refers to a preference
or prior right of acquisition by a specific claimant, typically the occupant.
In the early colonial period, it referred to a right claimed by one Eu­ro­pean
power against o­ thers to “first occupancy,” assigning a special status to the
original “discoverer” of a new territory. In the wake of U.S. in­de­pen­dence,
the princi­ple was recognized by the Continental Congress and reformulated
to apply to settlers on the western frontier. Effectively, it gave squatters a
right of first bid on territory they occupied, often at a significantly reduced
price, provided they had dwelled on the land for a given period of time
and had sufficiently “improved” it. In the period between staking an initial
claim and redeeming that claim through purchase, squatters ­were deemed
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

39

“tenants at ­will.”69 If they sufficiently improved the land and raised enough
capital eventually to buy it from ­under themselves at auction, they ­were
effectively exonerated of the crime of trespass. If not, the state could remove
them and sell the lands to more worthy competitors. In this way, a gray
zone of illegality was preserved within the confines of the law itself in the
form of delayed or belated enforcement: the distinction between an “illegal
squatter” and “valid tenant at ­will” could only be known in light of the
retrospective gaze.
Between 1799 and 1838, thirty-­three special or temporary preemption
acts ­were passed.70 Originally contained as clauses within legislation whose
primary intent was to restrict illegal squatting (e.g., within the Intrusion
Act of 1807), such provisions w
­ ere expanded and formalized in their
own right over the course of the 1820s, 1830s, and 1840s. In 1830 the first
properly titled “Preemption Act,” which included a general p­ ardon for all
inhabitants of illegally settled lands, was passed by Congress. Initially intended to be a temporary mea­sure, it set a new pre­ce­dent. By that point,
settlers recognized that they could effectively disregard the previous Intrusion Act since t­ here was a high degree of probability they would simply be
exonerated by ­later preemption legislation.71 In practice, then, the strange
recursive relation between the Intrusion and Preemption Acts actually encouraged illegal settlement. By 1835 the preemption bill was coming up for
renewal as frequently as annual appropriations.72
In 1841, revisions to the policy of preemption sought to remove its awkward retroactivity. From that point on, Congress did not even consider
settlement prior to purchase as trespass per se, subject to some provisos.
“Homesteaders” (as they w
­ ere now more positively deemed) had to be the
head of a ­family, a ­widow, or a single man over twenty-­one years of age and
a citizen of the United States (or current applicant for citizenship). They
could not already be the proprietor of 320 acres or more of land in any state
or territory, and must reside on the plot in question and “improve” it.73 In
this way, the Preemption Act not only gave legislative cover for squatting;
it continued the Lockean ideal of restricting appropriation based on good
standing, improvement, and sufficiency.
Squatters, homesteaders, and “tenants at w
­ ill” thus came to possess a
sui generis form of right—­the retroactively legitimized, quasi-­legal claim
of preemption. As a hybrid racial-­legal category of ­people, “Indians” possessed a corollary form of right that, not coincidently, was also referred to as
“preemption.” In the 1820s and 1830s, American Indian law came to codify

40

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

“Indians” as ­those who did not possess full rights to sovereignty and land
owner­ship.74 Theirs was a sui generis right of “occupancy” or “tenancy”
and, in this sense, was not entirely dissimilar to squatter rights. The Indian
form of preemption was, however, the inverted mirror reflection of that accorded to settler homesteaders. Whereas homesteaders possessed the preemptive right to purchase, Indians held the preemptive right to sell. This
truncated property right (i.e., the right to alienate) was, in effect, one of the
first “Indigenous rights.”
This does not mean that individuals once coded as “Indians” could
never purchase land. It did require, however, that they could not legally
own “homesteads.” For instance, legislation from 1865 provided for the first
time the possibility for some Indians to receive homesteads ­under the 1862
Homestead Act.75 An 1875 appropriations bill expanded and further entrenched this possibility but did so only through an explicit requirement
that said Indians had “abandoned” their “tribal relations” (including providing “satisfactory proof of such abandonment”).76 An 1884 revision to
this further clarified that “Indian homesteads” would be held in trust by
the federal government for twenty-­five years. The Dawes Act came into effect in 1887 and, for the forty-­seven years it was in effect, it provided the
legislative mechanism by which approximately 90 million additional acres
of lands w
­ ere appropriated from Indigenous nations and distributed to
“homesteaders”—an area larger than present-­day Germany.77 In his extensive documentation of this pro­cess, the historian David Chang concludes,
“Allotment combined the making of land into private property and the
taking of that private property from Indians.”78 In a strict sense definitional,
then, “Indians” alienated proprietary claims to land, whereas “homesteaders”
actualized them. A single person could perform both roles but not at the
same time: one was ­either an Indian or a homesteader.
Attending to the movement of Intrusion→Preemption→Homesteading
enables us to specify and concretize what it means to say that new property
rights in land “left no room for the Indians” or ­were “predicated upon their
dispossession and dehumanisation.”79 Moreover, we can better grasp the recursive logic of dispossession that made this pos­si­ble. First, we can observe
in it a kind of bootstrapping procedure that generates ­legal possession out
of avowedly extralegal seizures. The admixture of legality and illegality inherent in this expressed itself in both spatial and temporal terms, as both a
zone and a time, as the frontier and the waiting period between initial trespass and retrospective redemption through purchase.80 By Congress’s own

that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

41

lights, extralegal seizure was the primary mechanism by which the United
States expanded and consolidated its under­lying system of proprietary title:
theft quite literally produced property.
Second, this gives us a clear glimpse of the reconfigured relation between state and market. While the new republic attempted to deploy the
traditional mechanisms of state control to contain the socioeconomic pro­
cesses unleashed in the de­cades following in­de­pen­dence, sending military
and police agents to restrict illegal squatters, this proved ultimately futile.
Paradoxically, the state was both a central agent of market formation and
in thrall to it. The land market that was created over the course of the nineteenth ­century did not spring out of thin air as a model of self-­organizing
economic relations. Rather, it was a construct generated as much by the
coercive power of the state apparatus as by “private” interests and individuals. The new market for land was, a­ fter all, predicated on the military conquest of Indigenous ­peoples, their forced removal from the territories in
question, and their de jure and de facto exclusion from the market through
legislation explic­itly designed to ensured Indians could not compete with
white settlers when it came time to (re)purchase land at auction. At the
same time, however, state officials quickly found they could not fully contain or control market forces once they took hold. They could not fully control squatters, nor the proliferation of “Claims Clubs,” which colluded to
drive down land prices through collective bidding—­practices that gained
increased respectability and ­legal protection through such organ­izations as
the National Land Association (founded in 1844 by George Henry Evans)
and the F
­ ree Soil Party (active from 1848 to 1852). What, ­after all, was the
United States itself if not a particularly large and well-­armed claims club?
Thus, we find less a colonization pro­cess driven by state demands for territorial sovereignty or economic drives for capital accumulation than a complex meeting of both. The two w
­ ere interwoven since, much as government
officials might complain of meddlesome squatters, settlers ­were the primary
mechanism by which the state was able to convert frontier land from a
threatening external wilderness to a fiscal resource and national asset.81
Third and fi­nally, we have begun to identify the mechanism of transmission by which the dispossessive pro­cess became a global phenomenon.
Although initially wary of following the U.S. model, British colonial administrators in other regions of the world took note of the wealth and power it
was capable of generating.82 The new market in land, they recognized, was
inherently (not contingently) expansionist and could not be controlled by
agreements between gentlemen statesmen. One was ­either forced to adapt
42

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

or risk being drowned by the wave of “manifest destiny.” Thus, the dispossessive pro­cess begun in the new U.S. republic pressed upon colonization
pro­cesses elsewhere, reshaping Anglo settler policy across the globe into an
increasingly convergent form. As John Weaver puts it, “ ‘The expansionary
drive of American culture’ was not just American.”83 It is beyond the scope
of the pre­sent study to provide a full treatment of this complex field, but
two brief illustrative examples from Canada and Aotearoa/New Zealand
­will be useful.

The success of the U.S. model of territorial expansion placed immediate
pressures on the Canadian colonies, which ­were ­under constant threat of
being overtaken by the republic to the south from the time of the revolution through much of the nineteenth ­century. Not only was the United
States more populous and more power­ful; it was also a more attractive destination for many Eu­ro­pean mi­grants precisely due to the high availability
of land. Additionally, the Canadian example is often held up in contrast to
that of the United States, in part ­because, in the majority of the country at
least, the territorial acquisition pro­cess operated through a series of treaties signed between Anglo colonial officials and Indigenous leaders.84 ­These
came in two waves. From 1871 to 1877, Treaties 1 through 7 secured the
southern half of the western “prairie” provinces. Then, from 1899 to 1921,
Treaties 8 through 11 incorporated a vast expanse of land in the northern
half of ­those provinces, plus portions of what is now British Columbia,
Ontario, the Northwest, and Yukon territories. Since t­ hese ­were highly
formal, ceremonial affairs between the official representatives of the Crown
and ­those of the respective Indigenous nations, they seem to have more to
do with agreements between nations than transactions between subjects,
more about sovereignty than property. In one re­spect, this is true. Th
­ ese
agreements ­were understood to operate on this nation-­to-­nation basis, and
in many cases still are. Considered from the standpoint of high constitutional theory, the treaty system governing Indigenous-­Canadian relations
has been regarded as a model of cooperation and consent.85 Viewed from
the vantage of po­liti­cal economy, however, the Canadian and U.S. models
converge in impor­tant ways.
Colonial administrators in “British North Amer­i­ca” have long understood that the agreements between sovereigns would be practically meaningless if they w
­ ere not able to move large numbers of settlers into disputed
regions so as to practically displace Indigenous p­ eoples’ presence and
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

43

forestall U.S. annexation. For this, they needed more than treaties between
sovereigns; they needed property. Property served as both a ­legal mechanism to anchor Crown title materially and an economic incentive to motivate (re)settlement. Thus, although “the Canadas” retained a distinctive
­legal and po­liti­cal system, it was not long before administrators ­there reali­
zed that grafting this onto an American-­style system of landed property
owner­ship would be vital to maintaining and expanding British North
Amer­i­ca.86
This largely took the form of transitioning from a feudal and seigneurial
“land grant” system to a market system of direct purchase and sale. An early
moment in this transition arose in the late 1830s. In 1838 the Whig politician and eventually governor general and high commissioner of British
North Amer­i­ca, John Lambton, 1st Earl of Durham, was sent to the Canadian colonies to investigate the 1837–38 rebellions ­there. Accompanied
by Edward Gibbon Wakefield and Charles Buller, the trio eventually composed a Report on the Affairs of British North Amer­i­ca, commonly known
as Lord Durham’s Report. Much of the report contained recommendations
for changing the governance structure of the Canadas, and it is generally
credited with ushering in “responsible government” through the devolution
of powers to local, elected legislatures. What concerns us ­here, however,
are the sections of the Report dealing with land tenure. On this front, Lord
Durham observed:
The system of the United States appears to combine all the chief requisites of the greatest efficiency. It is uniform throughout the vast federation; it is unchangeable save by Congress, and has never been materially
altered; it renders the acquisition of new land easy, and yet, by means
of price, restricts appropriation to the a­ ctual wants of the settler; it is so
­simple as to be readily understood; it provides for accurate surveys and
against ­needless delays; it gives an instant and secure title; and it admits
of no favouritism, but distributes the public land amongst all classes
and persons upon precisely equal terms. That system has promoted
an amount of immigration and settlement of which the history of the
world affords no other example.87
Accordingly, the report recommended transitioning the Canadian land appropriation and distribution system to mimic that of the United States.
Since the landed gentry had a greater hold on the Canadas than was the
case in the more republican-­oriented nation to the south, this took some
time. However, over the next de­cades, the public lands system was radi44

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

cally transformed. By 1872 the new government of Canada formalized
this in the Dominion Lands Act, which was extensively copied from the
U.S. Homestead Act of 1862.88 From that point on, the Canadian landed
property system began to substantially converge with that of the United
States.
One major irony of this transition was that, although the model for a
homesteading market in land came from the United States, colonial administrators in British North Amer­i­ca (­later Canada) ­were wary of adopting it
for fear of being overtaken by waves of American citizens moving north.
In other words, they recognized that de jure changes to the l­egal system of
land acquisition and distribution could potentially lead to their de facto annexation by the United States.89 British colonial administrators knew this
well b­ ecause it was precisely what they ­were attempting to do vis-­à-­vis Indigenous ­peoples. Just as had occurred south of the (newly formed) border,
landed property incentivized the mass movement of Euro-­American settlers and, also like the U.S. case, the demographic shift had a corresponding
effect on l­egal interpretation. As the “treaty rights” of Indigenous p­ eoples
increasingly came into conflict with the public and private law of Anglo
settlers, they ­were incrementally hollowed out and subordinated to settler
interests.90 In short, dispossession did not proceed through macro assertions of sovereignty but through microlevel practices that worked to dismantle one infrastructure of life and replace it with another.91 Beneath and
beyond the lofty agreements encoded in the treaties, Canadian administrators worked to destroy the economic foundation of Indigenous socie­ties,
using starvation to drive them into submission.92 It was also at precisely this
time that legislation codified the legal-­racial category of “Indian,” which
included property restrictions for ­those unwilling to adopt Eu­ro­pean ways
or unfit for full enfranchisement.93 Together, ­these mea­sures produced
several waves of re­sis­tance, including the Red River Rebellion in 1869–70
and Northwest Rebellion in 1885 by Métis, Cree, and Assiniboine p­ eoples.
­These re­sis­tance movements ­were defeated by Canadian military and police forces and—­again following the U.S. model established in the Dakota
Wars—­led to the largest public mass execution in Canadian history: the
Battleford hangings.94
This hybrid public/private form of dispossession was given full judicial backing in the Canadas in St. Catharines Milling and Lumber Co. v. R
(1888). In that case, the majority (explic­itly citing Vattel, Montesquieu, and
Adam Smith) held that Indian title should be understood as “mere occupancy for the purposes of hunting.” It could not be taken in the sense of full
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

45

tenure, for the Indigenous ­peoples “have no idea of a title to the soil itself. It
is over-­run by them rather than inhabited.” In a succinct articulation of the
“negative” logic of Indigenous proprietary interests, the court concluded
that aboriginal title was “a right not to be transferred but extinguished.”95
The court clearly ascribed to “Indians” a certain right that could only be
actualized through alienation. Even the dissenting opinion did not dispute
the under­lying negative nature of aboriginal title. Justice J. A. Patterson objected to the majority, writing that Indigenous ­peoples should be “admitted
to be the rightful occupants of the soil, with a l­egal as well as a just claim
to retain possession of it, and to use it according to their own discretion.”
He even contended that this constituted a form of sovereignty “in a certain
sense.” When pressed to elaborate upon this “certain sense,” Patterson clarified, however, that he meant only that Indigenous p­ eoples “might sell or
transfer [the land] to the sovereign who discovered it.” They ­were still rightfully “denied authority to dispose of it to any other persons, and, u­ ntil such
a sale or transfer, they ­were generally permitted to occupy it as sovereigns de
facto.”96 This decision remained the princi­ple ­legal decision on aboriginal
title in Canada ­until the 1970s.

The convergence of U.S. and British modes of dispossession was not restricted to North Amer­i­ca. Rather, as John Weaver points out, as the colonies turned from land grants to land sales, distinctions between British and
American settler colonies eventually “consisted principally of instrumental
details; no longer did they express a fundamental divergence in convictions
about land, social order, and power.”97
The case of Aotearoa/New Zealand illustrates this point all the more.98
Although Eu­ro­pe­ans had had knowledge of the Aotearoa islands since the
seventeenth ­century, concerted efforts at colonization did not begin ­until
the early nineteenth ­century. British colonists ­were initially impressed with
Māori levels of sociocultural development, often contrasting them favorably with the Australian Aborigines, whom they held in lower regard. Of
par­tic­u­lar importance was the widespread practice of settled agriculture
among the Māori, which the British took as a sign of civilizational development. Consequently, British colonial administrators generally accepted
that the Māori held proprietary rights to the land and that Aotearoa was
not, in any meaningful sense, vacant or unclaimed land. As Ernst Dieffenback reported in 1843: “­Every inch of land in New Zealand has its
proprietor.”99 The result of this recognition was that the British colo46

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

nial ­government ­there expanded its territory primarily by acquiring land
through purchase—­acquisition by agreement, not by “occupation alone.”
Within this general framework, two serious obstacles remained. First,
as historian Stuart Banner explains, although the British generally recog­
nized that the Māori had some preexisting system of property, the radical
difference of that system continued to elude and frustrate them. The Māori
did not tend to allocate property rights to land through a geospatial
“grid” system, as was common in the Anglophone world. A par­tic­u­lar
Māori person could not “own” a discrete and distinct zone of space, over
which they could exercise exclusive control. Instead, property rights ­were
traditionally allocated on a functional basis. Individuals—or, as was more
common, families—­could claim a proprietary interest to a certain kind of
activity within a circumscribed context, for example, a right to fish from
this stream, or collect fruit from that tree, at this time of year, and so on.
Since proprietary interests ­were functional in this way, they overlapped and
coexisted in the same geographic space. Moreover, since they ­were typically apportioned based on familial lineages, recitation of genealogy was
more impor­tant to the reconstruction of one’s property rights than British
geospatial techniques of enclosure, fencing, and mapping. British colonists
of the period frequently expressed frustration at their inability to grasp the
myriad interlay of proprietary claims within a single space and, in par­tic­u­
lar, the difficulty in bundling them together so as to acquire total control
over all objects and activities within a single zone of space (as was their own
custom). As E. G. Wakefield complained to a committee of the House
of Commons: “The right of individual property has never existed in New
Zealand.”100
The second prob­lem was determining the extent of Māori territorial claims. Although many British colonial administrators ­were willing to
concede that the Māori possessed proprietary interests in the land, which
could not be unilaterally revoked without some cause, they disagreed over
­whether t­hose interests extended to all of New Zealand or only to ­those
parts that the Māori ­were physically occupying and “improving” at the time
of contact with the Crown. Even the 1840 Treaty of Waitangi, meant to
clarify such ­matters, left considerable ambiguity on this point. For while it
did confirm that the Māori w
­ ere to enjoy “full exclusive and undisturbed
possession” of their lands, it did not specify which lands fell ­under that designation. By the late 1840s, the general consensus among British colonial
elites was that the Māori could only lay claim to truly “possess” lands they
had enclosed and cultivated in good Lockean fashion. As Earl Grey, the
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

47

new secretary of state for the colonies, put it in 1846, the Māori had legitimate claims “to that portion of the soil, which they ­really occupied,” that
is, where they “practised to a certain extent a rude sort of agriculture.” This,
he was clear, was very ­limited: “The savage inhabitants of New Zealand had
themselves no right of property in land which they did not occupy.”101 In
the end, then, the colonial government did recognize some Māori rights to
land but only by a narrow, British standard.102
­After the 1840s, the strategy switched to affirming Māori rights to land
so as to secure the mechanism of transfer by direct purchase. By 1865 this
included direct purchase from individuals; it no longer required the collective assent of the tribe (despite the fact that, by then, the British had
grasped that Māori property rights w
­ ere not individuated in such a way
that a par­tic­u­lar individual could sell off a geographic space by him-­or herself ). A confusing mess of purchases resulted, which generated nearly endless appeals. Of the 9.3 million acres of land originally submitted to review
by dispute tribunals, 8.8 million acres w
­ ere deemed to have been transferred
103
improperly.
In response to this confusion, the Crown began to assert its right of preemption more aggressively. It effectively imposed a mono­poly over sales,
prohibiting settlers from engaging in private purchases directly from the
Māori. This reaped enormous financial benefits for the Crown, which made
huge profits by serving as the go-­between in settler-Maori land sales of
the 1840s and 1850s. This also meant, however, that settlers w
­ ere ­eager to
circumvent the system and buy more cheaply directly from Māori without
colonial intervention (and without taxation on sales). At the same time,
the Crown worked hard to prevent the Māori from forming a single organ­i­
zation that could control and regulate sales from their end. British colonial
officials ­were highly ­adept at playing one tribe against another, a policy that
often included the selling of weapons to ­enemy groups.
The Māori recognized that the British mono­poly over the point of sale
was to their g­ reat disadvantage and that, if they could coordinate a similar
mono­poly, they might be able to slow the land appropriation pro­cess and
exercise more effective control over it. To this end, dif­fer­ent Māori tribal
groups began to converge and coordinate such that, by the late 1850s, they
­were able to orchestrate an effective moratorium on land sales in the North
Island. In direct response to this, the British changed tactics in two impor­
tant ways. First, they altered the market for land. ­After 1865, colonial authorities began to impose high tariffs on land transactions. Māori sellers
­were expected to pay t­hese indirect costs, which severely undercut their
48

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

profits and bargaining position. By contrast, the government artificially
subsidized the pro­cess on the buyers’ end, effectively preventing the Māori
from passing on new costs to settlers. The second tactic was borrowed
from a very old imperial playbook. British colonial officials sold muskets
to favored Māori tribes, while imposing a moratorium on sales to ­those
who resisted the new market mea­sures. The resulting military asymmetries
generated intense intra-­Māori rivalry and, eventually, war. To some degree
this was a continuation of an older strategy. Between 1807 and 1845, an
estimated three thousand b­ attles had already been fought between vari­ous
Māori groups in the so-­called Musket Wars. This intensified again in the
1860s, however, when the British focused on breaking up efforts by Māori
leaders to halt land sales through the “King movement.” When full-­scale
war fi­nally broke out, one Māori commentator, Teni te Kopara, summed up
“the cause and the evil” in one word: “land.”104
The overall effect of this twin strategy was devastating for the Māori,
who lost control over the vast majority of territory, with ­little monetary
benefit to show for it.105 British colonial officials could boast on two fronts.
They had acquired almost the entirety of New Zealand and had done so
not through force and conquest but through contract and purchase. If the
Māori ­were resentful or regretful, this was interpreted as a symptom of
their own failure to transition to modern economic realities. As Attorney
General Robert Stout explained, Māori dispossession was due to the fact
that “the Natives cannot equal the Eu­ro­pe­ans in buying, or selling, or in
other t­hings. They have not gone through that long pro­cess of evolution
which the white race has gone through.”106
In less than one hundred years, British colonizers had managed si­mul­ta­
neously to convert the under­lying property regime of Aotearoa and transfer owner­ship of it. As Banner argues, if they ­were able to do so, it was
a function of two attributes the British possessed that the Māori lacked.
First, the British ­were able to effectively or­ga­nize themselves as a single
actor within the emerging land market, whereas the Māori ­were splintered
into several smaller units. This generated a structural asymmetry in the bargaining relationship, such that transfer was, in the long run, unidirectional.
This would appear to be an attribute of the market system itself. However,
it was ultimately generated by a second, extra-­economic attribute. As Banner points out: “The market looked the way it did b­ ecause the British ­were
power­ful enough to design it and to rebuff Maori efforts to impose a dif­
fer­ent structure. That power rested on the military and technological superiority that allowed the Eu­ro­pean states to colonize much of the world
that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

49

rather than vice versa. The British had the muscle to select exactly which
property rights they would enforce and how they would be enforced.”107
As a result, although the dispossession pro­cess in New Zealand operated
primary through a market mechanism, it was no less a function of coercive
force than the more openly-­declared wars and thefts that characterized the
Australian or U.S. cases. In effect, the British constructed a set of l­ egal, po­
liti­cal, and economic institutions in which the Māori literally could not
refuse to alienate their rights. Consent was legible only as assent to this
system of self-­extinguishment.

The above analy­sis provides specific, concrete examples of how the emergence of a system of landed property in the United States, Canada, and
New Zealand came to serve as a tool of dispossession in ­those locales. ­These
examples are, however, neither exhaustive in detail nor comprehensive
in scope. Much more could be said about each case, and the cases could
be expanded to include (at least) Australia or South Africa. What I have
provided is, however, sufficient for the immediate aims of my argument.
For we have established two impor­tant claims. First, one can now readily
observe that, despite the internally complex and heterodox field of Anglo
settler ­legal and po­liti­cal thought, a relatively uniform effect is nevertheless
observable with regard to the impact ­these pro­cesses had on Indigenous
­peoples. While the United States, Canada, and New Zealand have very
dif­fer­ent formal modes of authorizing and anchoring their ­legal claims to
territory, the ­actual situation on the ground as experienced by Indigenous
­peoples in ­these dif­fer­ent locales reveals considerable overlap. This ­matters
­because it offers an impor­tant rejoinder to the concern that anticolonial
critique imposes a false uniformity and coherence upon Western l­egal and
po­liti­cal thought, and “in so ­doing slips into precisely the kind of rationalist universalism that it decries.”108 In this case, the prob­lem lays not in the
uniformity of de jure assertions but in the convergent de facto materializations. This cannot be understood without taking into account the political-­
economic pro­cesses that actualize settler colonial ­legal and po­liti­cal claims,
nor without re­orienting the vantage point one brings to bear upon the
­whole and including Indigenous perspectives (points that are unpacked in
greater detail in chapter 3).
Moreover, we are in a better position now to see why t­ here are, in fact,
two contexts and two conceptual lineages ­behind the language of dispossession: one Eu­ro­pean and one Anglo-­colonial. In the first, dispossession
50

Chapter One
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

operates as a conceptual tool in describing and critiquing the transition
from feudalism to capitalism. In the latter, it functions to analyze how the
expansion of Anglo-­European systems of land owner­ship worked as a tool
of “legalized theft” in the apprehension of Indigenous territory. Through a
variety of ­these methods and techniques, over the course of the nineteenth
­century alone, Anglo settler ­peoples managed to acquire an estimated 9.89
million square miles of land, that is, approximately 6 ­percent of the total
land on the surface of Earth in about one hundred years: the single largest
and most significant land grab in h
­ uman history.109 An additional complication remains, however. ­These are not parallel stories that run in isolation
from one another but rather intertwined and practically co-­constituting.
What remains then is to think them in tandem, which is the aim of the
next chapter.

that sole and despotic dominion
This content downloaded from 192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:07:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

51


