---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
The Role of the Hudson's Bay Company in Pacific Northwest History
Author(s): Keith A. Murray
Source: The Pacific Northwest Quarterly , Jan., 1961, Vol. 52, No. 1 (Jan., 1961), pp. 2431
Published by: University of Washington
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/40487549
All thematic approaches to Pacific Northwest

the Spaniards, after the Astorians, and after the

Northwesters.
The records of its competitors are
history give substantial emphasis to the
Great
nowof
to the
be found only in the pages of the history
Fur Rush. This phase of the development
but the Hudson's Bay Company is still in
Pacific Coast extended over a period books,
of about
business.
eighty years, beginning sometime between
theWhile it no longer plays a significant
in Northwest affairs, its first decades were of
arrival of Vitus Bering in Alaska androle
James
suchtaperprofound importance to the opening of the
Cook at Nootka Sound. The fur trade was
Oregon Country and British Columbia that
ing off by 1836 and certainly, as far as old
Washing-

ton State was concerned, was at an end in 1845,

it is difficult to tell of its contributions without

seeming to indulge in wild exaggeration.
when Governor George Simpson ordered that
the headquarters of the Hudson's Bay Company Perhaps a simple statement of its functions

be transferred from Fort Vancouver to Victoria.

and operations may serve both to focus your

and to set an outline for my consideraDuring these two and a half generations, thinking
while
tion of the role of the Hudson's Bay Company in
the sea otter, fur seal, and beaver surrendered
the development of the Pacific Northwest. First,
their pelts to Frenchmen, Russians, Englishmen,
the
Company served as government for the vast
and Americans, hunting, trapping, and trading
region north of California and west of the Contiattracted hundreds of adventurous, reckless,

young men from the ends of the earth. nental
Some Divide. Second, it obtained much information
about the geography and aboriginal
made small fortunes; a few hard-fisted enterinhabitants
of the region - modern studies in
prisers made vast fortunes; scores of others found
ethnography,
anthropology, or geography would
only financial ruin or death. Search for new
be impossible to complete were the Hudson's
sources of furs provided a motivation for explorBay Company's records not available. Third, it
ation. Attempts to maintain supply and trading
expected its posts to be as nearly self-sufficient as
routes compelled some kind of governmental
possible, and it encouraged each responsible
functions. Profits to be made from trading on
trader to develop the natural resources around
the tributaries of the Columbia River system or
his trading post or fort to accomplish this end.
the Strait of Georgia attracted world interest,
American settlers found the Hudson's Bay
even though all but the most persistent were

Company's example and methods invaluable in
distracted by revolutions, wars, and Napoleonic
their own efforts to survive in the western wilder-

bombast.

ness. While the Company was not happy over

Through all of this activity, the outstanding
American immigration into its vast game preserve, the record shows that a fourth function of
"Governor and Company of Adventurers of
the Hudson's Bay officials was the protection of
England trading into Hudson's Bay." The Hudlives and property of settlers, and the acceptance,
son's Bay Company was not the first to trade in
if not the encouragement, of the villages that
the Northwest. It came after the Russians, after
American missionaries, mountain men, and prospectors built along the waterways of the Northname in the history of the fur trade is that of the

Keith A. Murray, professor and chairman of thewest.
History
Department of Western Washington College, hasIn
pubthe charter which created the Hudson's Bay

lished a number of studies in western United States his-

Company, the Crown declared the agents and

tory. This paper was read at the annual meeting of the
directors
of the enterprise to be "the true and
Washington State Historical Society in Tacoma in
April,

absolute lords and proprietors of the same terri-

1960.

24

PACIFIC

NORTHWEST

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QUARTERLY

tory."1 The governing authority of the Company
was reiterated in 1821 in "A Bill for regulating

the Fur Trade and establishing a Criminal and

Civil Jurisdiction within certain Parts of North
America/'2 The British government expected the
Company to maintain order, to prevent foreigners from trespassing on British soil, and to keep
the Indians quiet. Sir George Simpson, who was
appointed governor, became responsible for profits and for peace.

Sir George discharged his assignment magnificently. A competitor, who at first looked
upon the appointment with condescension (Sir
George was "reputed a gentlemanly man" who

would "not create much alarm, nor do I presume

him formidable as an Indian trader"), changed
his opinion within three years. He grumbled

against any white man, even its enemies. Other-

wise, it left the Indian to his own devices. The

Company made little or no deliberate effort to
impose European customs on him. It played no
part in inter-tribal or inter-village quarrels. It

did not interfere with Indian law or justice

where it concerned Indians alone. Above all,

while Company traders did on occasion trick the
Indians, the Company itself did not cheat them
in business dealings, nor did it try to push them
off their lands or move them to another part of

the continent.

Examples of Hudson's Bay policy toward the

Indians are numerous. Doubtless, some readers

are familiar with that part of American folklore
which tells how Chief Factor John McLoughlin
tricked the Indians into presenting themselves
thorities, and concluded, "In short, the Northin front of the gates of Fort Vancouver for a conwest is now beginning to be ruled with an iron
rod."3
ference before he made his formal appearance It is interesting to note that forty years laterthus indicating in a prestige-conscious culture
that the Hudson's Bay man was more important
effective control was still the order of the day.
In all the stories told of the wicked deeds of
than they. He did so by the simple expedient of
numerous western bad men, there are few told of
sending a physically huge Scottish bagpiper, comoutlaws living in areas controlled by the Hud-plete with tartan and pipes, to play an imprompson's Bay Company. There were no Dodge Cities, tu concert along the banks of the Columbia; the
Deadwoods, or Hangtowns on the Fraser. Dur- waiting Indians could not contain their curiosing the 1860's Boone Helm from Montana hope- ity and gathered around the piper to hear better
fully sought out the gold camps to earn a fewwhat wonderful noises he was producing. Suddishonest dollars. He did not find the law as
denly, at the strategic moment and with a fanfare of trumpets,
Dr. McLoughlin emerged.5 The
administered by the agents of James Douglas
to
Indians recognized that they had been outbe conducive to his peculiar talents; therefore,
he abandoned the unrewarding rivermaneuvered,
and re- but they respected a man who knew
their
customs well enough to trick them in this
turned to Virginia City and a hangman's
noose
way. In subsequent trading, they were never
applied by a zealous vigilance committee.4
cheated, and the Indians seem to have felt no
The secret of the Company's success was sim-

bitterly about the control of the Company au-

resentment over the incident.

ple. It broke the power of the head-hunting
Similarly, the Company authorities on Van-

northern Yuculta who had terrorized coastal In-

dians for generations. All leaders who couver
becameIsland taught the Indians there that they
could
expect justice, but that the white men
friendly with the Company as a result of this
were not to be trifled with. On one occasion

demonstration of power were supported, and atIndians
tempts were made to placate those who still
re- butchered and ate Company cattle stolen
from
the Company pasture and defied the whites
mained suspicious and unfriendly.
at Fort Victoria to do anything about it. When
The Company guaranteed protection to anyRoderick Finlayson, who was in command of the
one on his way to trade, while he was inside the
post, ordered the Indians to pay for their meal,
walls of the trading posts, and while he was on
the aborigines fired on the fort. By a ruse, Finhis return journey from a trading expedition. It
layson got the Indians to clear one of their
punished crimes of theft, violence, or murder

houses nearby, and then he completely demolished it with a charge of grapeshot. Thus, with
i E. O. S. Scholefield, British Columbia from the Earliest Times to the Present (Vancouver, n.cü. I. 330.
no loss of life to either party, the Indians were
2 Ibid., 338.
shown the power of the Company cannon. They
3 Ibid., 342.
immediately paid for the stolen animals, and
4 Russell Blankenship, And There Were Men (New
trade was resumed without further retaliation or
s Richard C. Montgomery, Young Northwest (Portland,

York, 1942), 191-206.

Ore., 1941), 118-19.
e Scholefield, British Columbia, I, 473-74.

censure. "We parted good friends," Finlayson

wrote into his report of the affair.6

JANUARY,

1961

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

25

Burial
Place
on

Cowlitz
River

Kane, Wanderings of an Artist (1859)

On another occasion a group of Whidbey IsRoss, John Work, W. F. Tolmie, James Dougland Indians was attacked and robbed as they
las, and Sir George Simpson, and such guests of
were leaving Victoria. They appealed to thethe Company as Duflot de Mofras,10 Paul Kane,
Company, and when the trader informed the
and David Douglas11 reported on many aspects
thieves that Indians trading with the Company
of Indian culture: head flattening; shamanism,

had the same protection as did the highest offitotemism, and other religious customs; slavery,
cials of the Company, the goods were promptly
social organization, and food gathering; customs
returned.7 To underline the Company attitude,
of birth, puberty, courtship and marriage, pregthe Whidbey Indians were given an escort of
nancy, medical treatment, death, and burial.

four white men to make certain that there were

Though Company officials did not always approve of the Indian customs they recorded, they
All of us are familiar with the story of how
left the Indians free to practice their folkways
Dr. McLoughlin recovered the property of Jedewithout interference as long as the Company

no other incidents.

diah Smith, who was attacked by Indiansruled
nearNew Caledonia. The versatile Paul Kane
the Umpqua River.8 Word went out through
the
certainly
did not approve of all that he saw Indian grapevine that the Hudson's Bay Company would protect all white men in its territory,
7 Scholefield, British Columbia, I, 475.

s Sir George Simpson, An Overland Journey Round the
even though they might be rivals of the ComWorld Durine: the Years 1841 and 1842 (London, 1847), 143.
pany. We are equally familiar with the efforts
9 Clifford M. Drury, Marcus Whitman, M. D . (Caldwell,
of Peter Skene Ogden to ransom the captiveIdaho,
sur-1937), 412.
10 Eugène Duflot de Mofras, Exploration du territoire
vivors of the Whitman massacre so that it might
de l'Orégon, des Californies et de la Mer Vermeille (Paris,
be known that no white person was to be
held
1844).
at the mercy of the Indians.9 It should also
11 be
David Douglas, "Sketch of a Journey to the Northwestern Parts of the Continent of North America During
noted that it was not the Hudson's Bay Comthe Years 1824-25-26-27," OHO, V (1904) and VI (1905).

pany that carried out the punitive Cayuse War;
12 Paul Kane, Wanderings of an Artist Among the Inthis was the work of the Oregon settlers. dians of North America from Canada to Vancouver* s
Island and Oregon Through the Hudson's Bay Company's
Territory and Back Again, ed. Lawrence J. Burpee, in
Master-Works of Canadian Authors, VII (Toronto, 1925),

149 et
passim.
United States history is replete with cases
of

i3 Unpublished MS, Beaver House, London (permission

carefully planned attempts to change Indiantoculpublish granted to H. C. Taylor, Jr., in 1953); Sir James
Douglas, Private Papers, second series (1853), corrupt copy
tural patterns. In general, Hudson's Bay observin the Provincial Archives. Victoria. B.C.. toassim.
ers simply recorded Indian customs and madei*no
William Fraser Tolmie, Diary (unpublished tran-

attempt to change them. Men like Alexander
script of original diary), copy in the Provincial Archives,
26

PACIFIC

NORTHWEST

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QUARTERLY

many times he was horrified by the acts of the
Indians - but his observations brought no orders
prohibiting the Indians from following their old
ways.12 It is difficult to assess properly the debt
anthropologists owe to him and those like him
for the patient and careful analyses they made
of Indian cultural patterns.

of Work and Peter Skene Ogden traveled up the
Snake, through Idaho and Utah, across northern
California and the Siskiyous to the Willamett
Valley, keeping careful records as they went.
Governor Simpson made copious notes of hi

travels,1" and it is no coincidence that Isaac Stev-

ens consulted with Hudson's Bay Governor Simpson before he began his own survey of the pro-

Two examples will serve to explain this assertion. In 1839 James Douglas compiled a
jected northern route for the Pacific Railway
systematic census of all the men, women, andsurvey.17 Naturally, the Company also used the

children, houses, and canoes in the Indian vil-

work of its predecessors: David Thompson of the

Northwesters, William Clark's charts and those
lages along Puget Sound, and since that time

every population study made in this region of
by the sea captains who mapped the islands and
anthropologists has used this work as a point
of of the North Pacific Coast. The final synbays
reference.13 A few years later, Dr. W. F. Tolmie
thesis, however, may be credited to the Company.
of the Puget Sound Agricultural Company made
The economic development of the states of
a glossary of the Nisqually language. George
Washington, Oregon, and Idaho and of the province of British Columbia would have moved forGibbs, the ethnographer and secretary for the
Stevens treaty-making team, later incorporated
ward in any event with the coming of settlement,
the Tolmie material into his own glossary, and
but the contribution of the Hudson's Bay Comwithout Tolmie's prior study, the Gibbs work
pany to this development was far from negligible.
would have had only a fraction of its present
From the first, Governor Simpson insisted that

value.14

Company operations should include many ac-

The geographical work done by the Company tivities beyond mere fur trading. "Every pursuit

was systematic and thorough. Its traders usedtending to leighten the Expence of the Trade is
old Indian trails, and its clerks and map makersa branch thereof," he announced. A trading post
recorded the routes thus followed. Modern high-might be built beside an important waterway:
ways have been built not far from some of these"The river with a potatoe Garden will abunroutes. Names like the Cariboo Road, the Hope- dantly maintain the Post," Simpson said. McPrinceton highway, or the Okanogan Trail areLoughlin carried out Simpson's instructions
used for the old Indian or fur-trader names.

Alexander Ross, the first white man to cross

faithfully. Among McLoughlin's letters may be
found careful directions to husbandmen regard-

the Cascade Mountains in the present state of
ing approved methods for planting grain and

Washington, recorded his route from the Methvegetables, fertilizing crops, increasing milk proow Valley to the Skagit River; this route subseduction, or building dams for irrigation.18
quently became the first cross-state wagon road,
the now abandoned Cascade Pass route. The

ubiquitous John Work pushed an expedition

The success of such operations is shown by the
report of W. A. Slacum, an agent of the AmeriCascades.15 Other brigades under the leadership
can Navy who visited the Hudson's Bay forts and

from the Columbia to the Fraser west of the

Victoria, B.C.; Myron Eells, "Decrease of Population
Among the Indians of Puget Sound," American Anti-

farms in 1837. He stated that at Fort Vancouver

alone there were 3,000 fenced acres of land under
quarian, IX (1887), 271-76; 34th Cong., 3rd Sess., House

cultivation, and that the previous year's harvest
Executive Document No. 76, B. Alvord et al., Indians of
Puget Sound and the Straits, with Statistics of Population, had been 8,000 bushels of wheat, 5,500 bushels

1857.

of barley, 6,000 bushels of oats, 9,000 bushels of

is John Work, "Journal of John Work" (introduction
and notes by Henry Drummond Dee), Archives of British peas, 14,000 bushels of potatoes and roots, with
Columbia, Memoir No. Y (Victoria, B.C., 1945).
pumpkins and other vegetables. He cited flocks
16 Simpson, Journey Round the World.

17 36th Cong., 1st Sess., Senate Executive Document, and herds of horses, sheep, goats, and swine; he
Isaac I. Stevens, Narrative and Final Report of Explorareported an orchard with apple, pear, and quince
tions for a Pacific Railroad near the Forty-seventh and trees all bearing fruit; he noted two sawmills
Forty-ninth Parallels of North Latitude from St. Paul to

and two flour mills in operation.19
James Douglas, in an official report two years
is 25th Cong., 2nd Sess., Senate Document No. 24, Willater, acknowledged only 861 acres under cultiliam A. Slacum, "Memorial and Praying Compensation for

Puzet Sound, 1855.

is Scholefield, British Columbia, I, 352.

His Services in Obtaining Information in Relation to thevation with yields of only about one-third as

Settlements of the Oregon River, December 18, 1837," 6-7.

much as Slacum claimed, but this would still

20 David Lavender, Land of Giants: The Drive to the
Pacific Northwest, 1750-1950 (Garden City,N.Y., 1958), 183.have been a substantial farming operation.20

JANUARY,

1961

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

27

Add to this the Cowlitz Farms, the farms around

States met at Fort Vancouver even before Lowell

Fort Nisqually, and recall that even the minorMason began his considerably better known work
posts had some garden space. Governor Simpson in Boston.24 To further religious observance, the
personally supervised the beginning of the potato officers of the Company called the Rev. Herbert
Beaver of the Anglican church to the Columbia
patch at Fort Colville.
The Company actively participated in the cat- River to serve his short, unhappy pastorate.25 It
tle business. Ewing Young's hazardous and diffi- also transported and protected Fathers Blanchet,
cult drive from California would have been im-

Demers, De Smet, and others in their work on

the Pacific Coast.26 The Lees, Whitmans, Parker,
possible without the support of McLoughlin,
who contributed over $800 to help promote
the
and
the Spaldings were all entertained at Fort
project.21 The Company complained in Vancouver.27
1860

that during the previous thirty years its white

American neighbors had stolen 6,058 head of

Hudson's Bay Company deliberately chose
cattle and almost the same number of sheep The
from
sites for its trading posts and forts that were not
its lands. If this claim were true, the Company
likely to be developed into future cities. With
obviously was well supplied with animals.22
the
The Company did not confine itself solely
toexception of Vancouver (Washington), Victoria, Hope, and Kamloops, not many of its
farming. Records show that, during the Sacramento gold rush, some Americans going tomajor
Cali- stations developed into permanent towns.
Many
fornia by sea stopped in Victoria to buy food
and posts, like Flathead House, Fort Okanogan, Fort
equipment from Hudson's Bay stores. After
a Nez Perce, Fort Hall, Fort Colville, or

brief period of debate as to the value of an Fort
ounceUmpqua, were completely abandoned; some
are buried under many feet of water piled up
of gold dust, the traders settled down to conductbehind
ing retail operations - perhaps the beginnings
of the Columbia power dams. Much the
same
the great chain of retail department stores
nowsituation exists in some of the posts in Canada, like Fort Alexandria, which is now marked
located in all major Canadian cities.
only by a cairn of rocks and a bronze plate.
The Company paid little heed to prospecting
for its own mines, but when coal was discovered
The policy of the Company was always to keep
at Nanaimo, it did not hesitate to add this comthe number of its employees small. In 1850 there
were still only about 600 Europeans, in addition
modity to its growing list of subsidiary activities.
to a fluctuating number of Indian laborers, in
The most important mineral strikes in the Northwest - the gold strikes of the Cariboo district -all of the posts of New Caledonia, both north
were organized, and for a long time afterward and south of the United States-Canada border.
the traders continued to reap a harvest of goldThis lack of concern for settlement, in truth this
which was faithfully shipped to London. Truly,hostility to city growth and development, was
part of the policy of the Directors whose trade
Simpson's orders that "Every pursuit tending to
with the Indians depended on how successfully
leighten the Expence of the Trade is a branch
thereof" took them far afield from the fur trade.
they kept out all trespassers, the chief of whom
Scientific, cultural, and religious activities were were American land speculators who might have
not forgotten by the Company. The Royal Hor- come for various reasons, but all of whom, for

ticultural Society sent David Douglas to Fort only the barest minimum of encouragement,

Vancouver in 1825 to study the vegetation of the were willing to plat a townsite and sell lots.
Northwest and to search for exotic plants. Doug2i Lavender, Land of Giants, 185.
las and the traders did not work well together,
22 John S. Galbraith, The Hudson's Bay Company as an
Factor, 1821-1869 (Berkeley, 1957), 201-202.
but his work is commemorated by the botanical Imperial
23 Kane, Wanderines of an Artist. 119-30.
name for the Douglas fir. (This, as I remember
24 Hazel Gertrude Kinscella, History Sings (Lincoln,
from a college botany course, is not a fir at all, Neb., 1940), 98, 306.
Thomas E. Jessett, ed., Report and Letters, 1836-1838,
but a false hemlock.) Paul Kane, the artist, has of 25
Herbert Beaver, Chaplain to the Hudson's Bay Comalready been referred to.23 Fort Vancouver had pany (Portland, Ore., 1959).
26 Pierre-Jean De Smet, S.J., Letters and Sketches, with
a library of books and newspapers from London.

a Narrative of a Year's Residence among the Indian Tribes
of the Rocky Mountains, in Reuben Gold Thwaites, ed.,
Early Western Travels, 1748-1846, XXVII (Cleveland,
that there was a library at all reflects considera-

It was small and not much used, but the fact

1906). This edition includes a facsimile of the original
ble credit on the management.
title page showing the place and date of publication as
If the little school operated for children of Philadelphia,
the
1843.
employees can be designated as a public school,27 Clifford M. Drury, Henry Harmon Spalding (Caldwell, Idaho, 1936).

it is interesting to note that the first public28 Lavender, Land of Giants, 181.

school music class in what is now the United
28

PACIFIC

29 Drury, Spalding, 258 et passim.

NORTHWEST

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QUARTERLY

The attitude of the Company toward settle-

to the mutual consternation of all concerned.

ment, however, does not alter the fact that what

The Hudson's Bay Company grumbled, but contented itself with urging Americans to remain
south and east of the Columbia and the Snake.
made with the help of the Hudson's Bay officiais.
When these men made a serious effort to keep
The Company's own negative policy of refusout interlopers, they were usually able to do
ingso,
to grant land titles to prospective British
settlers also aided the growth of settlement south
as Nathaniel Wyeth, Hall J. Kelley, Jedediah
of the Columbia. Some of the immigrants to the
Smith, or Captain Benjamin L. E. de Bonneville
could testify.
Northwest from the Red River Country joined

American settlement did occur before 1850 was

the
Americans where land was available and a
When the American missionaries Jason
Lee,

Marcus Whitman, Henry H. Spalding, and others
man could have absolute possession of what h
first came, the Directors warned Dr. McLoughlin
could clear of timber and hold from claim jump-

or Indians. On the flimsy excuse that th
against aiding them. They suspected thaters
"the

formation of a Colony of United States citizens
Willamette Valley was more fertile than the Cow
on the banks of the Columbia was the main or
litz Valley, Hudson's Bay employees, who might
fundamental part of their plan, which, if successnormally have leased land from the Company
and not
held their own claims as tenant farmers,
ful, might be attended with material injury,
only to the Fur trade, but in a national point
of the feudal relationship, quit their jobs,
spurned

and moved south to join the Americans and
view."28 In spite of the warning, McLoughlin
sold the missionaries clothing, household
other
fur-British immigrants who gravitated to the
mission
stations and the little towns growing
nishings, farm equipment, and enough food
to

around them.
last until the following harvest. Other missionaries, encouraged by the treatment of the trail
Thus, by protecting the settlers when they first
blazers, sailed or walked to Oregon to add arrived,
to the
following a policy of salutary neglect
numbers of settlers in the Willamette, Snake, and
while they grew self-supporting, and failing to
recognize the driving force of the hunger of men
Clearwater valleys.
When Ewing Young gave up his life as a wan- and women of peasant stock to own their own
dering mountain man and settled down to farm- land, the Company saw settlement grow so large
ing, he became the forerunner of other American that it could no longer control its neighbors, not
non-missionary settlers like Joe Meek, Robert only south of the Columbia, but north of it as
"Doc" Newell, and William Craig,29 who brought well. It could not prevent the Americans from
their families (white or red) and settled near the building stores, mills, and towns anywhere, even
mission stations - sometimes, it might be noted, in competition with its own older operations,

Hudson's Bay
Company Fort
at Victoria

Winthrop, Canoe and Saddle (1913)

JANUARY,

1961

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

29

and finally McLoughlin himself gave up against
a background of censure and criticism from his

and others. William Slacum's report was strongly
slanted against the Company, charging, among
directors, superior officers, and associates, left the
other things, that McLoughlin's refusal to end
Indian slavery was detrimental to the welfare of
service of the Company, and himself joined the
settlers at the falls of the Willamette.
the Americans in Oregon.33
Curiously, the Americans who wrote the early
Hall Kelley, in particular, saw only a monhistory of the Northwest were singularly relucstrous evil crouching behind the Company's
tant to give the Company credit for the rolestockades
that
at Vancouver, Nez Perce, Okanogan,
it did play in the governing and development
andofelsewhere.34 Even when he was imprisoned
the region. Partly, of course, this was due to
forthe
debt in Boston, he was convinced that somefact that many of those who wrote the accounts
how the long arm of the Company had reached
out from British soil across the continent in an
had unhappy personal quarrels with the management of the Company, or were so deeply suspieffort to ruin him. On his wild trip alone to Calicious from prior indoctrination that every act
of and Oregon, he was incapacitated with
fornia
the Company was looked upon as part of a sinisfever and probably would have died save for the
ter conspiracy by an organization of foreigners
to
charity
of his enemies; but he found no good in
destroy honest American citizens going about
them, only malignant persecution.
their daily business on American soil. Naturally,
Hazard Stevens, the official biographer of his

not all of the actions of Hudson's Bay agents
father, Governor Isaac Stevens, claimed without

were those of selfless men without malice or evil

hesitation that the Chehalis treaty council failed
design. Some associated with the Company because
were
of the opposition of former Hudson's

mean, vindictive, and even cruel. But the won-

Bay Company employees who believed their

der is the mass paranoia that seems to have enliquor monopoly and system of Indian peonage
gulfed Americans when they talked or wrotewould
of
end if a treaty with the United States
the Company and its operations.
government were signed by the natives. He cited

as his authority the testimony of a Nisqually

Indian.35 According to the reasoning of Ameri-

can settlers, the Indian Wars of the 1850's in

In order to give some balance, and to prevent
Washington and Oregon were in large measure

this paper from becoming a tabulation of only
the result of Company plotting.

the great deeds and personalities of the Com-

The rampaging forces of manifest destiny fipany, the comments of these hostile American
nally
compelled the Hudson's Bay monopoly to
witnesses might be reviewed briefly.
retreat north of the forty-ninth parallel. The

The Rev. H. H. Spalding insisted until the
crowding settlers claimed and occupied land

day of his death that the Whitman massacre was
which the British thought to be rightfully theirs.
an unrighteous plot of papists and the Hudson's
The wagon trains and prospectors used brigade
Bay Company to destroy American Protestanttrails to enter regions formerly known only to
ism,30 in spite of the fact that Peter Skene Ogden

fur traders. The Indians, decimated by disease

certainly rescued all of the survivors at the exintroduced by the settlers, were herded on to respense of the Company, and that Spalding himself
ervations and systematically badgered, cheated,
was indebted to Father Brouillet for his personal
starved, and shot, until the survivors became

safety, if not for his life.31 The settlers who

framed Oregon's Provisional Government wrote30 41st Cong., 3rd Sess., Senate Executive Document No.
into their organic law a clause specifically pro37, "Spalding Document," 4, 14, 26 ff.
si Lavender, Land of Giants, 264.
hibiting Dr. McLoughlin and the Hudson's Bay
32 Ibid.. 242.
Company from enjoying any holding south of
33 Slacum, "Memorial."

the Columbia,32 even though some of their de-34 Hall J. Kelley, A.M., History of the Settlement of
and the Interior of Upper California and of the
liberations took place in the grain warehouse Oregon
of
Persecutions and Afflictions of Forty Years Continuance
the Company at Champoeg.
Endured by the Author ^Springfield, Mass., 1868V 20-23.

35 Hazard Stevens, Life of Isaac Ingalls Stevens (Boston,
Josiah Spaulding presented a report to Con-

1900),
II, 7; Joseph T. Hazard, Companion of Adventure
gress, duly printed at public expense, which (Portland,
asOre., 1952), 142-46.

36 Memorials Presented to the Commissioners under the
serted that depredations by the Hudson's Bay
Treaty of July 1, 1863, Between Great Britain and the
brigades practiced on Northwest Indians were

United Slates, for the Final Settlement of the Claims of

followed by attacks by the maddened red men
the Hudson's Bay and Puget's Sound Agricultural Companies, Presented April 17, 1865 (Washington, D.C., 1865).
on weaker parties of Americans who happened
37 John A. Hussey, History of Fort Vancouver and Its
along the way later, and thus was the basic cause
Physical Structure (Portland, Ore.: Washington State Hisfor the tribulations of Jed Smith, William Bailey,
torical Society, 1957).
30

PACIFIC

NORTHWEST

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QUARTERLY

sullen, uncooperative hangers-on to the fringes
of European culture and were no longer a source
of profit. The fur animals became fewer in number, and demand for their pelts in Europe and
the eastern United States declined. The United

and allowed others almost to disappear from the
memory of man.
Only the prejudices, the legends, and the folk-

lore remain. No living man remembers when

the Company was a power in the Northwest. The
States government determined to resolvehundreds
poten- of thousands of adults who have moved
tial disputes by purchasing all claims of
thestate of Washington in the 20th century,
to the
their children, born in the last few decades,
Hudson's Bay Company in Washington and
Terri-

tory allowing the settlers free reign in developing
need constantly to be reminded of the past in
the region.
order to understand the present. An unpreju-

When tentative negotiations began, thediced
Com-study of the Hudson's Bay Company is
essential
pany at first made the fantastic demand
of to this understanding. Some such stud-

$3,800,000 for the few run-down buildings
ies that
have been made. Dr. John Hussey's work on
remained on the trading-post sites, the farms,
Fort Vancouver is an example of what can be
done.37
and property rights on grazing lands. After
pro-More books of this caliber need to be
tracted negotiations that extended through
the
written,
and other projects should be started.
members of the Washington State Historiperiod of the Civil War, the claims were The
settled
for only a few thousand dollars, and the cal
operaSociety are well aware of one such project:
tions of the Company in Washington were the
over.36
search for descendants of employees of the
The triumphant Americans moved in, used
Hudson's
timBay Company, commenced appropriately
enough by the Society itself. I commend it
bers from Company buildings for their own
cabto your attention and covet your support for this
ins or for their prospecting operations, converted
some of the sites to farms - or even to airports
and all- similar projects.

Danny Pierced One-Man Show
BY ROBERT D. MONROE

For the first time since 1949, the Western Books

Pierce's book is not one to be overlooked. It is

exhibition sponsored by the Rounce and Coffin boldly conceived and dramatically executed, both
Club of Los Angeles includes a book produced inin content and in form. There were other strikthe state of Washington. The event is note- ing books in the 1960 collection, to be sure, but
worthy.

Those who are unfamiliar with the Club's

the blaze of color in Danny Pierce's Little No

Name obscured the austere beauty of The Tragedie of King Lear from the Grabhorn Press or the
splendid annual selection of the typographically
mellow
touches of the Book Club of California's
"best" books wholly produced in the West
would
Figure Prints of Old Japan.
have been impressed by the 1960 collection
(books produced in 1959) had they seen the
trav- numerous books are produced in the
Although
eling exhibition when it was shown in
Tacoma
state
of Washington, seldom do they meet all the
and Seattle. Especially so, had they noticed
a
Rounce and
Coffin Club's exacting criteria. Some
book created by Danny Pierce that is a are
veritable
not bound in the West and are ineligible for
one-man show: he wrote the text, designed
the
that reason
alone. The commercial presses in the
work, cut both the text and the illustrations in
state have not attempted to achieve the degree of
wood, and printed the book in his Red Studio typographical
at
excellence essential to considera-

Kent. And notice it they would, for Danny

Robert D. Monroe is curator of rare books in the Suzzallo

Library at the University of Washington.

Danny Pierce. Little No Name. Kent, Washington,

1959. C/o Fred Meadowcroft, 712 W. Meeker Street, Ken
Wash. [42] pp. Folio. Illustrated. $25.00.

JANUARY,

1961

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:09 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

31


