---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
"The Leviathan of the North": American Perceptions of the Hudson's Bay Company,
1816-1846
Author(s): William R. Swagerty
Source: Oregon Historical Quarterly , Winter, 2003, Vol. 104, No. 4 (Winter, 2003), pp.
478-517
Published by: Oregon Historical Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20615367
"The Leviathan of the North"
American Perceptions of the
Hudson's Bay Company, 1816-1846

In the summer of 1833, while touring the Upper Missouri coun
try as a guest of Pierre Chouteau and the American Fur Company
(AFC), the German prince Maximilian witnessed a series of extraor
dinary events. At Fort McKenzie, in the heart of Blackfeet country,

he was present when David D. Mitchell, the chief clerk at the fort, intro

duced Ninoch-Kiaiu, the Bear Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, who,
Maximilian recorded in his journal, "had always been very faithful and
devoted to the Whites and the Fur Company." Ninoch-Kiaiu wore "a new
uniform, half red and half green, with red and green facings, and trimmed
with silver lace; a red felt hat, ornamented with many tufts of feathers; in

short, a complete dress, and a new double-barrelled percussion gun."
Maximilian continued:
Mr. Mitchell wished particularly to distinguish this man [Ninoch-Kiaiu], because he
had never been to the north to trade with the Hudsons Bay Company. When he had
equipped himself in his new uniform, which was worth 150 dollars, and entered the
assembly of the chiefs in the court-yard of the fort, it immediately became evident

that the distinction conferred upon him made no favourable impression on them;
some chiefs who had made presents to Mr. Mitchell, and had not yet received any
thing in return?for instance, Mehkskehme-Sukahs, could not conceal their feelings;
the latter hid his head behind the person who sat next to him, while others hung down

their heads, and seemed lost in thought. When Mr. Mitchell perceived this, he caused

it to be intimated to the chiefs, that "they saw how the American Fur Company

478 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

? 2003 Oregon Historical Society

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QHS neg.,OrHi 21681

Astoria is depicted here in 1813, the year the Americans lost the fort to the British. Gabriel
Franch?re, who witnessed the transfer of Astoria to the North West Company, published the
sketch in his Narrative of a Voyage to the Northwest Coast of America in the Years 1811,
1812,1813, and 1814. Astoria was restored to the United States in 1818.

distinguished its faithful friends; that they, on the contrary had generally taken their

beaver skins to the English; that he, therefore could not give them much now, but
would make every chief a present. That it would be [in] their interest to deal with him

in future, like Ninoch-Kiaiu, and then it would be in his power to make them more

considerable presents."1

Mitchell's strategy of favoritism exacerbated long-standing rivalries
and recent tensions among the Indians who were present at Fort McKenzie
in the summer of 1833. In August, after a number of "violent disputes" had

erupted among Indian traders as well as among the hired engag?s, a white

employee named Martin was accidentally shot with a pistol by a Blood
Indian who had, "till that time, always conducted himself well," according

to Maximilian. The incident pitted Indian against Indian. Ninoch-Kiaiu
sided with the whites, who decided to execute the accused murderer. This

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 479

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

OHS neg., OrHi 37550

further embittered the Bloods, who determined
to seek vengeance at the appropriate time.2

For the remainder of the summer, Indian

bands of twenty to forty lodges each ?represent

ing the Blood (Kainai), Piegan (Pikuni),
"Sikesekai" (Siksikai or Blackfoot proper), and
their allies, the Gros Ventre ? appeared before
Fort McKenzie.3 As he struggled to keep violence

to a minimum, wooing Blackfoot trade away

from Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) hands,
Mitchell came to appreciate how little power the
Americans held in Blackfoot country. On August
14, a "half Indian" named The Bird arrived to find
only twenty-three lodges of Blackfeet remaining
at the fort. Maximilian described him as "a tall,
The seal of the North West

Company

strong man, with a brownish complexion,
[&] thick black hair" who "spoke the language of

the Blackfeet perfectly and lived constantly
among them." He judged him to be a "treacherous, very dangerous man,
who had great influence among the Blackfeet." The Bird had traded with
and cheated both the AFC and the HBC, and by then was a free agent who
"lived by catching beaver, and hunting, for his own account."4

Several days later, upon learning that the Bloods had ambushed and
killed his nephew while he was looking for his stolen horse near the fort,

the Bear Chief sent the corpse to Mitchell as a present and asked him "to

revenge his kinsman." After consulting a "sensible old Indian" who "ad
vised that this matter should not be treated as a concern of the whole tribe,

but as a private affair," Mitchell did nothing beyond properly seeing to
burial by Blackfeet custom.5 Maximilian recalled:
As the murder of the Indian was a consequence of the offence which Ninoch-Kiaiu
had offered to the Blood Indians, on the occasion of Martins death, the present could
not well be refused, and we were obliged to be very cautious how we left the fort, as the

Blood Indians were hostiley [sic] disposed toward us.6

Mitchell feared the worst. In desperation, he requested The Bird to inter

cede in hopes of avoiding a blood bath. Maximilian would later record
this as a misjudgment:
many unfavourable reports were spread of the hostile disposition of Ninoch-Kiaiu
and his adherents toward the Whites, which had, doubtless, been excited by the
pernicious influence of the treacherous Bird, who was prejudiced against the Com

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4
This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

pany. An Indian told us that his countrymen would demand double the usual price
for the beavers, and, if that were refused, they would kill all the Americans.7

What followed is the well-known incident that precluded a Piegan
Blood-White war at Fort McKenzie. On August 28, the twenty or so re
maining Piegan lodges outside the fort were surprised at daybreak by
around six hundred Assiniboins and Crees. Men, women, and children fell

in their lodges, and both sides suffered casualties. Mitchell opened the
doors of the fort to take in the Piegan wounded and, in so doing, improved

his diminishing reputation and enabled the American Fur Company to
remain in Piegan country. Plains Indian ethnologist John C. Ewers ana
lyzed the implications of the affair:
This battle brought to an end the Piegan-Assiniboin peace McKenzie had negotiated
at Fort Union less than two years before_Fearing the defection of the Piegans, the

Hudson's Bay Company had built Piegan [Peagan] Post on Bow River that very
summer. They hoped its more southerly location would attract the Piegans and
prevent the more northerly Blackfoot tribes from carrying their furs south to trade

with the American on the Missouri.8

The HBC plan failed. After a short trial run, Peagan Post, located west
of present-day Calgary and also known as Old Bow Fort, was abandoned,

it being an "abundance of trouble and expense," in the words of Chief
Trader J.E. Harriott. More to the point, as historian Hugh A. Dempsey
has summarized, "the Blackfoot soon made it clear that they wanted the
white man's trade goods but they did not particularly want him. Peagan
Post survived a couple of hectic years, but by January, 1834, it was evident

that the traders were not welcome, so they retreated to the muskegs of

Rocky Mountain House."9
Meanwhile, the American Fur Company suffered a short-term loss
from increased international and inter-tribal strife. While HBC craftsmen

refitted old Rocky Mountain House for the much safer and more reliable
trade with the Blood Indians, Kenneth McKenzie, Supreme Agent of the

Upper Missouri Outfit of the American Fur Company, penned a letter
from Fort Union to Mitchell on January 21,1834:
Your beaver trade has certainly fallen very short of my expectations, but I will give you

the credit of getting every skin that could be obtained respecting the course you
pursued when the fort was attacked. I look to the motives which prompted you. They

were noble 8c evinced the purest & strongest devotedness to my interest, what the
eventual result may be only time can determine but it is more than probable had I

been in your situation I should have done as you did. We can only regret that the
Leviathan company of the north have means so extensive & goods so cheap [,] but

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North"

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

they will not drive me from my purpose, industry & perseverance will overcome
many obstacles, and if your Indians are faithful another season maybe more profit
able than the present.10

CKENZiE?a scot by birth and a former North West
Company clerk who had been released by the HBC in 1821
at the time of the great merger of those two companies ?
was at the peak of his power in 1834. Twelve years earlier,
this "King of the Missouri," as he became known, had struck out on his own
and entered the trade on the upper Mississippi.11 In 1822, while in St. Louis,

McKenzie became an American citizen, a practical decision that gave him
legal license to compete with his "fellow Americans." Soon thereafter he

joined as a partner in Joseph Renville's Columbia Fur Company (also
known as Tilton and Company) and helped make it a success both in the
upper Mississippi country and on the middle stretches of the Missouri
River.12 By 1826 it had become apparent to the recently formed Western
Department of the American Fur Company that McKenzie held the key to
expansion upriver into the potentially lucrative Indian trade of the north
ern Plains and Rockies.13
Affairs on the upper Missouri went fairly smoothly for McKenzie and

for the American Fur Company up to 1834, but by year's end company
owner Pierre Chouteau, Jr., ordered him to return downriver. Both

McKenzie and the newly reorganized AFC needed a cooling-off period.
McKenzie had jeopardized the Company's license in the Indian trade for
distilling liquor at Fort Union, something he claimed he had to do to
compete successfully with the HBC after the 1832 congressional ban on
dispensing alcohol to Indians in their own country. In a letter to Chouteau
in March 1834, McKenzie explained:
After 20 years experience in the Indian trade I can safely declare that an entire prohi
bition of liquor if rightly enforced would be an almost incalculable relief to the trader,
but you well know that the Indians of this district from their proximity to the trading

establishment of the H.B.C. have always been accustomed to the use of liquor, & it is

by no means extraordinary that they should seek to be supplied therewith when
making their trade on this side of the line. I am well convinced that if I had liquor I
could extend the trade very considerably but having none I do the best I can.14

McKenzie left the trade for a vacation in Europe and other business
pursuits. Although he lost the inertia of personally competing with his old
rival, the HBC, events of the 1830s proved him right on the need for high

quality, relatively inexpensive trade goods and sufficient liquor, guns, and
ammunition where tribes demanded such. McKenzie also understood, as

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Reprinted with the permission of the publisher from Trading Beyond the Mountains, by Richard Somerset Mackie, ? University of British Columbia Press 1997.
All rights reserved by the publisher.

This map identifies the districts of the Hudson's Bay Company as they were defined in 1830.

The Columbia Department in the West stretched from the forty-second parallel, the
northern frontier of Mexico, north to Russian America and from the Pacific Ocean east to the

Rocky Mountains.

most diplomats did not, that international boundaries or trading agree
ments drawn by and for Euroamerican nations mattered not to Indian
hunters and their families. What counted was receiving full measure in
goods and proper protocol for delivering furs and robes. In the trading
year of 1834-1835, only a year removed from Martin's death and the as
sault by the Cree-Assiniboin war party, Fort McKenzie's returns amounted
to 9,000 buffalo robes, 180 wolves, 200 red foxes, 2,800 muskrats, 19 bear
skins, 1,500 prairie dogs, and 1,020 beaver pelts.15 Fort McKenzie remained
an active post wedged in the heart of Blackfoot country until 1844, when it

was abandoned and later burned. During its fourteen-year tenure, only
four American Fur Company personnel were killed by local Blackfeet, and
those men, John Ewers believed, "may have deserved their fate because of
their own misconduct."l6

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 483

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Historians of the fur trade were quick to pick up the two themes that
surface from the incidents at Fort McKenzie in 1833 and 1834. Hiram M.

Chittenden, an engineer who spent much of his career with the Army

Corps designing dams and locks on the Missouri and Columbia rivers,
turned historian in his spare time and wrote the seminal study in the field.

In his influential, The American Fur Trade of the Far West, published in

1902, Chittenden devoted an entire chapter to "The Liquor Traffic" and
another to "The Stress of Competition." E.E. Rich's comprehensive history

of the HBC, published in i960, contains a parallel chapter on American
opposition. Paul Phillips, LeRoy R. Hafen, and David J. Wishart repeated

these highlights to the point that competition for trading spheres and
influence among the Blackfoot and the Assiniboin became stock subjects
in surveys of western North American history. Most surveys also include

sections on the Blackfeet "threat" or "menace" to trappers and traders
active in the northern Rocky Mountains. Occasionally, this resistance is

attributed to American trespass, but more commonly Blackfeet opposi
tion to Americans is interpreted as British-induced violence to protect

market-share and trade territory. Recently, Eugene Y. Arima and David
Smythe, ethnohistorians with Parks Canada, independently revisited the

subject, providing valuable international context for Indian-white rela
tions, and historian John C. Jackson has recast the story of the Blackfeet in

the nineteenth century as "a culture under siege." v
What has been neglected in these discussions is a consideration of Ameri

can attitudes toward the HBC during the height of its expansion in the
region the British and Canadians called "Columbia." Despite shared Anglo
and French heritage, Americans ? even those deeply involved in the fur
trade ? knew little about their northern neighbors. The exceptions were
businessmen whose livelihoods were directly affected by monetary or dip
lomatic agreements, but even then sensationalism during this age of ex

pansionist rhetoric conditioned popular opinion.18
In addition to Kenneth McKenzie, New Yorker John Jacob Astor and
New Englander Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth were notable examples. Astor used

connections and influence on both sides of the international boundary
and was pragmatic in using combinations with foreign companies to op
erate a truly North American, international enterprise. The South West

Company ? a joint American and Canadian venture ? was organized
for this purpose in 1811 and was very successful in the Great Lakes up to
1816. His plan was set back by the War of 1812 and the loss of Astoria in 1813

to the British. In 1818, after three years of closed-door discussion in Lon
don, Astoria was restored to the United States on the technicality that it

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

OrHi54

had been taken by a British
naval expedition during the
recent war, therefore quali
fying it for restitution under

the Treaty of Ghent. Despite
Astor's persistent efforts for

restoration through his

friend Albert Gallatin and

many in Congress, the
American Fur Company
flag was not to fly again over
the site because Astor's men

had openly sold the fort
prior to its formal seizure.
In 1832, two years before re

tiring from the fur trade,
Astor reflected on his deci
sion to sell out to the North

West Company and to
abandon the Columbia
country. He wrote his old
friend Wilson Price Hunt:
"Had we succeeded in keep New Yorker John Jacob Astor was a pragmatic

businessman who used his connections and influence to

ing Astoria, ere now we make his Pacific Fur Company an international

should all have made great

fortunes there, and even

operation.

more and much more than the Hudson Bay Company now do."19
In the wake of the War of 1812, international policy shifts necessitated

new paradigms in American fur-trade interests throughout the West. The
1794 Treaty of London (Jay's Treaty), which had allowed British and Ca
nadian agents to continue the Indian trade on American soil, was rescinded
by the U.S. Indian Trade and Intercourse Act of 1816. The act, which Astor

guided through Congress, stated that "licenses to trade with the Indians
within the territorial limits of the United States shall not be granted to any
but citizens of the United States, unless by the express direction of the
President... "20 Even this protectionist measure was not seen as sufficient
to the interests of many Americans. Since 1815, several plans to garrison
the Canadian-U.S. border had been proposed to Congress. In 1818, Secre

tary of War John C. Calhoun wanted to establish an army post at the
mouth of the Yellowstone River and sent an expedition to "extend and

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 485

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

protect our trade with the Indians." In his instructions to the expedition

leaders, Calhoun wrote:
... English traders ... have great advantages in controuling the savages thro' their
commanding station on Red river, and as our contemplated establishment at Yellow
Stone, will greatly curtail their trade towards the head of the Missouri, we must expect

every opposition from them. No pains must be spared to counteract such efforts_21

The Yellowstone Expedition never reached its goal. Logistical prob
lems with steamboats and, most significantly, Congress's withdrawal of
support in the wake of the Panic of 1819 led to abandonment of the original

purpose. A permanent military presence on the Missouri was established
near Council Bluffs at Missouri Cantonment (later Fort Atkinson), where
over eleven hundred U.S. soldiers were stationed in 1820. But this was little
noticed in Whitehall or at York Factory, where the Northern Council of
the HBC convened for its annual directors' meeting to discuss Lord Selkirk's

colony on Red River and the Company's expansion in Athabasca, the
Columbia District, and New Caledonia.22

he rhetoric in congress and among military men set a
tone in foreign policy that contrasted sharply with the diplo
macy of shared occupation evident in the Convention of 1818,

which provided that the territory "Westward of the Stony
Mountains, shall, together with its Harbours, Bays, and Creeks, and the
Navigation of all Rivers within the same, be free and open, for the term of
ten years ... to the Vessels, Citizens, and Subject of the Two Powers."23 Dur

ing the First Semin?le War in 1818, for example, a brash Andrew Jackson
executed two British subjects in Spanish Florida and recommended to his

superior, General Henry Atkinson, that all British traders caught on
American soil be hanged.24 From that time to the signing of the Oregon
Treaty of 1846, Americans exhibited mixed views about the political geog
raphy of Oregon but most agreed on the potential benefits it might bring
to the nation.25 Those same Americans and many of their elected officials

also had a difficult time making up their minds about the international
legal rights of the London-based Bay Company. Few understood that Par
liament had granted monopoly charter to the behemoth, with power to
regulate and control the fur trade of Rupert's Land as well as to build posts

and establish farms and other enterprises, without relinquishing Royal
claim of the lands within the Company's domain. Prior to 1813, all Com
pany properties lay on the north side of the Columbia. After that year, in
addition to Fort Astoria (renamed Fort George), the HBC absorbed other

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QHS neg., OrHi 964

Artist Joseph Drayton, who traveled with the Wilkes Expedition, depicted this scene of fur

trappers at Fort Walla Walla in 1841. The fort had been named Fort Nez Perces when the
North West Company first established it in 1818 at the fork of the Walla Walla and

Columbia rivers.

posts through its merger with the North West Company in 1821. Fort Nez
Perces, built by the North West Company in 1818 and renamed Fort Walla

Walla in 1825, was one such prize, as were Spokane House and the Flathead

Post in Montana.26

Much of the confusion stemmed from conflicting signals sent from the

nation's capital. Under the U.S. law of 1816, the President and his desig
nates could grant licenses to foreigners to trade on American soil. By 1817,

exceptions were made in the upper Great Lakes where Governor Lewis
Cass of Michigan allowed foreigners to enter agreements with all Ameri

can trading companies, notably David Stone and Company, a Detroit
based rival of the AFC's Northern Department. An ardent champion of
free enterprise, Cass opposed the U.S. factory system established by Con

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 487

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

gress in 1790, hoping to keep liquor and unethical traders out of Indian
country, and was instrumental in its demise in 1822. Describing the system

as "radically incorrect," Cass gained supporters in the administration and
Congress, looking for any means of trimming the federal budget after the
business downturn of 1819.27

In the meantime, the opportunity for most Americans to hire Cana

dian traders ended under President Monroe, who in November 1818 re
voked all licenses granted by James Madison. The political friends of Stone

and Astor, however, combined interests and persuaded Monroe to allow
Americans to hire Canadian boatmen and interpreters. American private
fur-trade interests also clamored for military and legislative protection of

their capital and human investments in the West. Eastern financiers re
sented the loss of opportunity on the Pacific Coast and in the Northwest
generally, and Astor faulted the government for its inaction in exploring,

policing, or garrisoning the Far West.28

Many St. Louis-based merchants and fur companies knew it was in
their best interest to keep settlers, soldiers, and government agents out of

Indian country, but the complications and challenges inherent on the
Missouri and in the Rockies prompted requests for federal intervention.

Most tribes, but especially the Teton Sioux, Arikara, Gros Ventre, and
Blackfeet, were not disposed to allowing white trappers to displace their
own hunters or to pass freely through their territories and regions where

they had secured status as middleman-traders. They insisted on doing
business with whites in the same manner that had become customary in
trading with other tribes, with trade often overlapping sporadic fighting
and counting coup through theft of horses, furs, and other personal ef
fects. Fur-trade merchants in St. Louis were slow to understand these dy
namics, and white lives and American dollars were lost when their field
personnel circumvented proper Indian protocols and sovereignty.29
This is a familiar story in the succession of St. Louis-based fur compa

nies from the formation of the Missouri Fur Company in 1809 to the
consolidation of several smaller concerns into the Upper Missouri Outfit
of the American Fur Company in 1827, an oligopoly up to its final dissolu
tion in 1865. Both Congress and the British were blamed. High tariffs set

by Congress on British and French imports ? especially firearms and
trade goods of metal, glass, and woolens ? meant that American fur
traders paid dearer prices on imported trade goods than did their Cana
dian neighbors. From 1816 through the 1830s, fur men blamed Congress
and asked for relief, finding some on specific goods but suffering a general

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

increase.30 In 1830, William Clark, superintendent of Indian affairs at St.

Louis, wrote:
... the American Trader is not only dependent upon his competitor for the very
articles themselves, but has to pay his own Government an average duty of about 60

percent for the priviledge of importing them;... in addition to the advantages al
ready enjoyed by the British Trader, he is priviledged to land & find a market for his
furs & peltries ... in the United States, free of duty (which is not reciprocated by G.
Britain), it will be seen at once, that no Enterprise, talent, or industry can successfully

compete in this Trade, under such disadvantages.31

Some Americans were also convinced that the British promoted
American losses by encouraging Indians to steal or confiscate American
procured furs in the field.32 Ultimately, the Bay Company bore the brunt

of a jealous and expansionary American citizenry that wanted its share of
British good fortunes in the Oregon Country and along the international
border. This was especially characteristic after the North West Company

merged with the HBC in 1821, a consolidation perceived as a conspiracy

against American interests along the border as well as in the joint
occupancy area. In 1822, the St. Louis Enquirer editorialized:
Since the abolition of the United States' factories, a great activity has prevailed in the

operation of this trade. Those formerly engaged in it have increased their capital and
extended their enterprize, many new firms have engaged in it, and others are prepar

ing to do so. It is computed that a thousand men, chiefly from this place, are now
employed in this trade on the waters of the Missouri, and half that number on the

Upper Mississippi. The Missouri Fur Company, which alone employs upwards of
300 men, have reached the mountains, and will soon be on the Columbia River.
Others have the same destination, so that the rich furs ofthat region will soon cease
to be the exclusive property of the Hudson Bay Company... ,33

Government officials, fur merchants, and traders sided with victims of

Indian depredations. A survivor of a well-publicized attack on the Mis
souri near the Arikara villages in 1823, in which twelve white trappers died

and an equal number were severely wounded, expressed the exaggerated
view of many Americans:
The hostility of the Ricarees, Black-feet, Snake, Chiaus [Cheyennes], and Assiniboines,

is entirely owing to the influence of the Northwest or Hudson Bay Company._
From the English they can get what liquor they want, and the distance is nothing to an
Indian, when he has in view the gratification of his passions. Among the Ricarees I saw

several English medals, and some of British manufacture_The government must
remedy these abuses; she must divest herself of that appalling slowness that attends

all her operations_The risque is too great for individual enterprise when unaided
and unassisted by the government.34

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North"

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Hudson's Bay Company Archives, Archives of Manitoba, HBCA PP2150 Part 5, p. 153 (N13869)

This 'American Trapper of the Ancien R?gime" is from Robert Browns A Graphic and

Popular Description of the Countries of the World Illustrated (parts), published in 1867.

490 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

The U.S. responded by sending a retaliatory expedition against the
Arikaras, not the purported Bay Company "instigators" to their north.

After an inconclusive battle against several hundred American soldiers,
sixty armed trappers, and seven hundred Sioux allies, the Arikara agreed
to parlay and then slipped out of their villages during the night to avoid
further retribution.35
Americans did not conceal their envy or their admiration of the suc

cesses of the Bay Company on the other side of the Rockies. St. Louis
newspapers alerted the public to the success of William H. Ashley's first
Rocky Mountain Rendezvous of 1825, noting that
Ashley has indemnified himself for all the losses occasioned by the murderous attack

of the Arikaras in the summer of the year 1823_In the course of his expedition,
Geni. Ashley fell in with a party in the service of the Hudson Bay Company, who are

believed to have 1,000 men in their employment west of the Rocky Mountains. The
riches which this company are carrying out of the territory of the United States are

immense, and beyond all calculation_36

Ashley's information came directly from twenty-nine men "who had
recently withdrawn [by desertion] from the Hudson ['s] Bay Company" as
well as from his business partner, Jedediah Smith, who had visited Flat
head Post along Clark Fork in western Montana in the late fall of 1824.
Ashley was especially impressed with the reported eighty thousand beaver
coming out of "that district called the Snake country, which Mr. Smith
understood as being confined to the district claimed by the Shoshone In

dians." Most of the HBC deserters were Eastern Iroquois ? "intelligent
men, who were formerly attached to the British trading companies, and
who have resided many years with the Flat Heads" ? and they became the
subject of a strong American defense of the right to engage in free enter

prise in the joint occupancy area. Shoshone, Nez Perce, and Crow also
came to be viewed as friendly in the American trade sphere of the inter
mountain West and were defended in print and before Congress as inde
pendent of British influence. Even Ashley feared British motives, however,

stating in 1827: "We know... that it is the interest of the British traders to

poison the minds of the Indians in the region of the Rocky Mountains
against us."37
That same year, the Missouri Observer reported Ashley's returns from
the third annual rendezvous as "probably worth 60 or $70,000." The edi

tor of this influential newspaper repeated the familiar accusation that
American citizens were constantly endangered "from the Black Feet and

other Indians, who are instigated to rob and murder our people by the

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 491

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

British traders, who have almost exclusive possession of our territories at

and beyond the Rocky Mountains...." The writer estimated the number

of foreign interlopers on American soil to be a thousand men and sur
mised "their annual depredations upon us perhaps about a million of
dollars in money, besides exciting our own Indians against us."38

I

N 1831, a presidential fact-finding committee deter
mined to set the record straight in an eighty-six-page report that
included assessments of American trade throughout the West. Will
iam Gordon, a former Missouri Fur Company trader, claimed that

"five or six hundred men," "fitted out partly from Missouri and partly
from Santa Fe" and "exclusive of the British, who also hunt constantly west
of the mountains and [who] did hunt to the east of them until the Ameri

can hunters became numerous there," were scouring the West trapping
beaver. The British, he claimed, "come to our side of the line, and mean to
exhaust it first: so that the treaty privilege to hunt and trade on our side is

of great value to them."39 William H. Ashley provided further testimony:
Hunting is the only way our citizens have to contend with the British on our ground

in and beyond the mountains, their advantage in trading being so great as to put

competition out of the question. They bring their goods from Hudson's bay, and
from the mouth of the Columbia, without paying any duties, while ours, being
imported through the United States, are subject to heavy duties, perhaps an average
of 50 or 60 per cent. These goods are of the same kind, being made in England, and the
Indians are good judges of their quality and price, so that the difference of 50 or 60 per

cent in their cost puts it out of the power of the American trader to compete with the

British traders. The British, besides their permanent posts along the line of our
frontiers, have temporary winter establishments on the American side of the line,

where they trade with our Indians, and nearly monopolize the trade on account of

their advantages.

As for Americans, Ashley continued,
It is universally considered unsafe to go on the country claimed by the British; and no

American has ever ventured to do it and I have no doubt would loose [sic] his life and
his property if he did. They [the British] have spread over the whole region west of the

Rocky mountains, quite to the Mexican territory, while no American has gone north

of 49 degrees, nor even north of the Columbia, nor often to it_the Hudson s Bay
Company may.... be considered the sole occupants, as they are the only persons
who have any pretensions to a regularly settled system of business, or who have any
establishments in that country.

Ashley concluded with a perspective Congress seldom heard: "Both the
Hudson's Bay Company and citizens of the United States engage in trap

492 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QHS neg., OrHi 5448o

ping, and each suffer occa
sionally from the attacks of the

Indians ... [however,] I saw
nothing to justify the opinion
that they excited the Indians
to kill and rob our citizens."40

Congress continued to
collect testimony on valua
tion of the fur trade and dep

redations on American prop
erty. The Astor firm claimed

that its fur operations in
North America were worth
slightly more than one mil
lion dollars a year, and Will

iam Gordon calculated an

annual return of $150,000 on

furs brought into St. Louis

alone. Indian Agent John
Dougherty tabulated total
valuation for the fur trade of

Sir George Simpson (1876-1860) served as the

the Upper Missouri and Hudsons Bay Company's governor-in-chief from 1821
Rocky Mountains from 1815

to i860.

through 1830 as $3,750,000, a

profit of $1,650,000 to fur
companies.41 Another inquiry revealed that 234 Indian depredations had
occurred in the contested area since the Treaty of Ghent, leaving at least
150 Americans dead and $149,374 m loss of property, a shocking total that

led Dougherty to recommend building "a small military post, say two
companies" to protect the fur trade in the U.S.-Canadian border region
of the Upper Missouri.42

The forced removal of tribes to Indian Territory and resistance to
American expansion during the Black Hawk War in 1832, however, di
verted presidential and congressional action from the Far West. By 1833,
large and small fur companies alike determined to strike bargains with the .

Bay Company if offered the opportunity. Through its general manager,
Ramsay Crooks, the American Fur Company charted the way, accepting a
proposal from Governor George Simpson to receive ?300 per year in re
turn for a promise not to interfere with Indians or the Indian trade to the

north or to the west of Lake Superior.43 This little-studied agreement ben

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 493

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

British Columbia Archives, PDP 05241

In 1845 or 1846, British army officer Henry James Wane painted this watercolor of Fort

Vancouver, a trading post on the Columbia River established in 1825 to oversee the Columbia

Department of the Hudsons Bay Company. Wane, who was twenty-five years old when he
traveled to the West in 1844, compiled a rich pictorial record of the HBC's western operations.

efited both companies in that the AFC was able to guarantee fishing rights
on the north side of the Great Lakes, which was the largest profit sector for

the company in the late 1830s and 1840s. The agreement was extended
every two to three years, with minor modifications until 1847.44

The American Fur Company also worked with the HBC by sharing
market information on furs through the listening post of broker Curtis M.

Lampson in London. Lampson entered the trade as a Yankee fur pedlar for
Astor, who sent him to London in 1824 to buy furs at auction from HBC
sales. He founded his own company in 1830 and became London agent for
the New York office of the AFC in January 1835, a relationship that contin

ued through the 1860s.45 Once furs reached British warehouses, neither
HBC nor AFC planned to lose the opportunity to sell at the highest price.
Lampson seldom offered furs from both companies simultaneously in large
lots to furriers based in Britain or on the Continent. In fact, in the interest

494 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

of avoiding a glut on the market of any single species of animal, Lampson
often sent catalogues of upcoming sales as well as marked ones of previous

sales to his clients. This level of "friendly competition" meant that com
pany managers in North America were instructed to get along with the
opposition as best they could in order to maintain a workable, mutually

beneficial arrangement abroad.46 Once Lampson's information was in
house, both companies guarded it from the opposition. For example, in
February 1838, William Brewster of the AFC's Detroit office received a
duplicate copy of Lampson's "dear opinion of the prospects for Furs and
skins," with the admonition, "Mr. Lampson's observations you will keep
entirely to yourself." Ramsay Crooks predicted: "If Hudson's Bay Co. will
only sell stock and leave a clear market, prices must be low, the cheapness
will make skins more generally used, and the market will return to a healthy
state."47

Based on the infrequency of letters to and from London as well as the
repetition of Lampson's reports to the Northern Department and to part
ners in the St. Louis-based Western Department, it appears that manag
ers in the interior received their market news directly from New York and

mainly from Ramsay Crooks, part owner and operations manager of the

Company. The Western Department often negotiated with rival compa
nies, but no record exists of any formal compact for trade or agreements
on trading spheres with the HBC. After 1833, friendly posturing and some

assistance in supplying remote opposition posts or traders-in-transit per
meate an otherwise rather sterile documentary record.

^T^he final part of this story takes us back to the Or

1 egon Country, where several diplomatic and economic probes
1 were tested from 1834 to 1846. Nearly all explorers, traders, mis

.JIL sionaries, prospective settlers, and U.S. government agents who
visited the region found it to their liking. Company post managers, espe

cially Dr. John McLoughlin, impressed people as exceptionally helpful
and kind. These same chroniclers raved at the productivity of Bay Com
pany enterprises ? in furs, crops, fisheries, and livestock. As public offi
cials wrestled with diplomatic matters, private citizens provided contra
dictory views of the Bay Company's largess.48
Negative voices were few, but they were loud. Hall J. Kelley's was the
most widely heard. His earliest tract in 1830 reveals deep admiration for
British accomplishments in the Northwest. A year later, in his General
Circular to all ... who wish to Emigrate to the Oregon Territory, Kelley called

upon Congress to grant American citizens the same rights in Oregon en

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 495

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

joyed by the HBC under parliamentary authority, arguing that the HBC
was a "Colonial Government," not a trading company. In the two decades
that followed, however, his remarks became vitriolic as he painted a con
spiracy against his American Society for the Colonization of Oregon. The
chief purpose of the HBC, he charged, was "to cheat and kill Indians, and
get gain." He claimed that McLoughlin had treated him "with every dem
onstration of inhumanity" and labeled him a "persecuting monster," a "ly

ing spirit... busily engaged in spreading falsehood and calumny among
the settlers and strangers."49

Ironically, a second sour view was offered by one of Kelley's critics. On

the streets of Boston and in print, W.J. Snelling directly challenged the
logic of Kelley's plans, doubting that half the emigrants who wanted to
leave the East for Oregon would make it as far as St. Louis. The way west,

Snelling warned, was full of danger, aridity, and hostility, and the object

? land, timber, fisheries, and good soil ? was obtainable in the state of
Maine with far less trouble. Snelling wryly concluded: "the fur trade has
been over-done, done to death, for twenty years; especially in Oregon."50

Most eyewitnesses of HBC operations did not agree. Guests at Mc
Loughlin's table were astonished at their remarkable progress in so short a
time. Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth, the Boston ice-cutter who had been influ

enced by Kelley's Oregon Colonization Society, struck out to make his
fortune in fish and furs in the joint occupancy area. His description of his
reception at Fort Vancouver in 1832 is typical of other first-hand accounts
of the time:
Here I was received with the utmost kindness and Hospitality by Doct. McLauchland
the acting Gov. of the place_Our people were supplied with food and shelter from

the rain which is constant_I find Doct. McLauchland a fine old gentleman truly
philanthropic in his Ideas he is doing much good by introducing fruits into this
country which will much facilitate the progress of this settlement (Indian corn 3000
bush) The gentlemen of this Co. do much credit to their country and concern by their

education deportment and talents-The Co. seem disposed to render me all the
assistance they can they live well at these posts they have 200 acres of land under
cultivation!;] the land is of the finest quality.51

There were some who fared less well. Prior to Wyeth's venture, Gover
nor Simpson had received two independent offers from Americans active
in the Northwest. Jedediah Smith had agreed to give up plans to trap the
Snake River country in 1828 in exchange for the Company's purchase of his

horses and furs. He also requested HBC assistance in retrieving the re
mains and effects of eleven of his men who had been slain following the
disastrous fight with the Umpquas along the Oregon coast in July of that

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

OHS neg., OrHi 305

year.52 A second proposal in 1829
was tendered by former Missouri

Fur Company partner Joshua
Pilcher, who offered to lead a party

of trappers into Blackfoot coun
try on behalf of the Bay Company.

Simpson refused the offer, fearing
it would set a precedent of trespass

across international boundaries
that would eventually escalate fric
tion with Americans.53

Capt. Benjamin Bonneville
made no proposal to the Bay
Company, but he also became a
casualty of the fur-trade diplo
matic war. Born in France, Bonne
ville had immigrated with his par

ents to the U.S. and graduated
from West Point. In 1831, he took a
leave of absence from the army and
entered the trade as a private agent,

Nathaniel J. Wyeth, who led expeditions in

writing to his superiors that he in

1832 and 1834 in an effort to establish his own

of the Indian tribes and their hab

Vancouver Chief Factor John McLoughlin had
treated him uwith the utmost kindness and

tended to ascertain "the location business in the West, reported that Fort
its, visit the American and British Hospitality."

establishments, make myself ac
quainted with their manner of trade and intercourse with the Indians,
finally, endevour [sic] to develop every advantage the country affords and

by what means they may most readily be opened to the enterprise of our
citizens." Financially backed by Alfred Seton, a New York merchant and
former Astorian, Bonneville struck out for the Green River with no men.
In 1832, he built a fort named for himself near present-day Pinedale, Wyo

ming. For the next three years, he made Fort Bonneville his headquarters
for reconnoitering the region, including areas occupied by the Bay Com

pany, and may have been a secret agent for the United States.54 When
Bonneville arrived at Fort Walla Walla in 1834, Chief Trader Pierre Pambrun

suspected espionage and was faced with a serious diplomatic dilemma.
The American writer, Washington Irving, gained access to Bonneville's
private journal and recast the story to a wide reading audience in 1837.
Once Bonneville and his men were fed, Irving tells us:

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 497

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Washington Hood, cartographer, OHS neg., OrHi 80863

This map shows Oregon Territory in 1838, during the period when Great Britain and the

United States jointly occupied the region and companies from each nation were attempting
to control the fur trade.

The worthy superintendent, who had extended to him all the genial rites of hospital

ity, now suddenly assumed a withered-up aspect and demeanor, and observed that,
however he might feel disposed to serve him, personally, he felt bound by his duty to

the Hudson s Bay Company, to do nothing which should facilitate or encourage the
visits of other traders among the Indians in that part of the country.55

Immediate physical needs were seldom denied weary travelers, but it is
clear that Bay Company officers carefully weighed the motives of the itin
erant tourists and likely spies who passed through the Columbia. Bonneville

was denied supplies and given an "unkind reception of the traders," who
entreated him to return to the States as quickly as possible, forcing him to
subsist, he claimed in a letter to Secretary of War Lewis Cass, "on horses,

498 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

dogs, roots & occasionally a salmon." He concluded: "the Hudson Bay at
present have every advantage over the Americans."56
The highest praise for the Bay Company came from those seeking in

formation, protection, supplies, or a good meal. Missionary Jason Lee
reported that post manager Pierre Pambrun at Walla Walla had received
him with "great civility" and that Dr. McLoughlin "has treated us with the

utmost politeness, attention, and liberality." In an 1838 letter to her par

ents, Narcissa Whitman described McLoughlin as "our excellent friend

and kind benefactor" and elsewhere described Fort Vancouver as the "New
York of the Pacific Ocean."57
Early Oregon settlers and even military representatives of the United
States reinforced these sentiments. John Ball, a graduate of Dartmouth
College and one of the earliest American farmers in Oregon, sent a series of

letters home during his trek with Nathaniel Wyeth's party in 1832. The
letters were published in the New York Commercial Advertiser. While on
the Columbia, he wrote: "Mr. M'Laughlin encouraged a few men (some of
whom came out here with Mr. Astor's concern) to settle on the Multnomah,
where ... I intend to settle. He has liberally engaged to lend me a plough,
an axe, oxen, cow, &c."58
As the political climate to take over Oregon intensified in Washington,

all seemed peaceful on the Columbia. Both Lt. Charles Wilkes in 1841 and

Capt. John Charles Fremont in 1843 met McLoughlin, who cooperated
with their respective surveys of the region. McLoughlin provided Wilkes
with a large bateau, nine of his boatmen, and camp equipment from Fort
Vancouver's stores to facilitate the American scientific expedition. Fremont

later wrote: "Dr. McLaughlin [sic] ... received me with the courtesy and
hospitality for which he has been eminently distinguished, and which makes

a forcible and delightful impression on a traveler from the long wilderness

from which we had issued." McLoughlin also helped American settlers,
Fremont reported: "I found many American emigrants at the fort; others
had already crossed the river into their land of promise ? the Walahmette
[Willamette] valley. Others were daily arriving; and all of them had been
furnished with shelter... ."59

Capitalists with an eye on land, furs, or commercial opportunities
seldom shared the world views of preachers, soldiers, and ploughmen, but

they also exercised caution in not wearing out their welcome in the HBC
dominated Northwest. Wyeth in particular planned to take full advantage
of the spirit of joint occupation by moving directly into HBC-controlled

parts of the Oregon Country. His early favorable remarks about the
Company illustrate his diplomatic acumen in gaining a foothold within
Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 499

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Dr. John McLoughlin, chief factor at Fort Vancouver from 1824 to 1846, was charged with the

oversight of the Columbia District of the Hudsons Bay Company. He posed here with George

Warren Hyde and Dan O'Neil and his granddaughters Margaret Rae Wygant and Louisa
Rae Myrick.

the Columbia District. As H.M. Chittenden put it, "Wyeth's indomitable
pluck won for him the admiration of every one and particularly of the

philanthropic Hudson Bay Company factor at Fort Vancouver, the
venerable Dr. John McLoughlin. These two men formed an earnest and
lasting attachment for each other with which the necessities of business
competition were never permitted to interfere."60
Behind a thin mask of diplomacy, Wyeth's aggressive plans to become a

power broker soon surfaced.61 In 1832, he concocted two grandiose inter
dependent schemes. He proposed to supply Americans at the annual Rocky

Mountain Rendezvous with goods brought overland from Boston and
New York in exchange for cash and furs ? hardly a novel scheme, but no

500 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

one had attempted such from both coasts. He would also harvest salmon
from the Columbia for trans-shipment in barrels by sea to the East Coast,
where a ready market existed for salted or pickled fish, an industry that the

Bay Company was developing and that had only a short history on the
Columbia dating back to 1829.62 In February 1832, true American compe
tition arrived when two Yankee ships, the Owhyhee and the Convoy, crossed

the Columbia bar and spent the spring trading with local Indians for

salmon and furs. This forced the HBC to reduce its trade tariff consider
ably in order to keep local Indians from totally abandoning Fort Vancou

ver's trade shop. The ships departed on July 29, "after giving us an immen
sity of trouble," McLoughlin recalled. Over a year later, fifty-three barrels

of Columbia River salmon were unloaded at Boston.63

Nathaniel Wyeth was connected with some of the same Boston mer

chants who were behind this and other Pacific Coast speculations. His
own plan became more elaborate in 1833. In a remarkable letter to Gover
nor George Simpson, Wyeth proposed a five-year agreement in which the
HBC would supply goods to Wyeth, who in turn would trap the area south
of the Columbia and deliver all furs to the Company. Wyeth stated his case

plainly using economic savings and high profits as the guiding reason why
the HBC ought to accept his offer. He asked to form his own brigade of
around fifteen trappers through an HBC agent, exclaiming: "Canadians
are to be had cheaper than Americans and are for some purposes better
men." He also planned to build a post "on the Columbia or south of it for
collecting furs and salmon to be sent to the States by vessells [sic] ordered
therefrom such vessells to bring out the goods required for the trade." The

issue of joint occupancy is imbedded in his reminder to Simpson: "It ap

pears to me that as an American I posses [sic] some advantage than an
Englishman would not inasmuch as I can visit parts of the country from
which he is excluded and still not so remote in point of distance difficulty
or expense as from St. Louis."64 Wyeth's proposal did not require an imme

diate decision by Simpson, who had departed for England, where he spent
the winter.
By summer, Wyeth was rescuing another of his ventures, this one at the

annual mountain man rendezvous. From Green River, Wyeth wrote HBC
trader Francis Ermatinger, who had not attended the gathering that year:
... you would have been Robbed of your goods and Beaver if you had come here_I
give you this as an honest opinion which you can communicate to the Co. There is
here a great majority of Scoundrels. I should much doubt the personal safety of any
one from your side of the house.65

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North"

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Wyeth returned to Boston where he wrote Simpson on November 20,
regretting that he had troubled him with the original proposal: "all fur
ther negotiations for the present are at an end in regard to this subject."
But the next year he was back in the West, determined to execute his plan
with or without the HBC. At great expense, he carted thirteen thousand
pounds of merchandise to the rendezvous, only to find he was too late to

swap his consignee ? the Rocky Mountain Fur Company ? for its furs.
Angered and frustrated, Wyeth is said to have told Milton Sublette and his

partners, "Gentlemen, I will roll a stone into your garden that you will
never be able to get out."66

Before hearing from Simpson, whose terse rejection of Wyeth's pro
posal did not reach the Columbia until October, Wyeth took advantage of

distance from London and Washington. He approached McLoughlin di
rectly and asked him to intervene. In a very unusual document drafted to
formalize their agreement, McLoughlin accepted Wyeth's salmon fishing,

horse trading, and merchandising to American trappers. Wyeth prom
ised not to encroach on the trade out of Fort Vancouver or above the

Grand Ronde River, and McLoughlin agreed that the HBC would not
trade beyond the Grand Ronde, except for Snake Country brigades under

Francis Ermatinger and Thomas McKay. Those brigades would continue
to have the right to enter the country to the south and west to trade with

American trappers as well as the right to participate independently at the

American summer rendezvous. McLoughlin also authorized trader Pierre
Pambrun to supply Wyeth with goods for his post, should he fall short
from his own sources.67

Historians have mulled over the exceptional good treatment given
Nat Wyeth and the implications of this agreement. Herman J. Deutsch
speculated that had American fur traders been stronger, the division of
fur-trade bailiwicks on either side of the Grande Ronde may have become
the international boundary. John S. Galbraith has reasoned that, in theory,

the HBC considered concessions to the opposition "repugnant to the poli
cies of the Company, which sanctioned permanent division of territory
only with a large company capable of enforcing its part of such arrange
ment." On the practical side, however, "the Company surrendered little of

value, for the Grand Ronde country was not rich in furs and the right
granted Ermatinger and McKay to trade at the rendezvous preserved the
Company's only valuable connection with that country." As Dorothy Nafus
Morrison has recently written in her biography of McLoughlin, "the idea

appealed to McLoughlin as reasonable and sound. In 1829 Governor
Simpson had told him that if rivals appeared, the company should cmeet

502 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

them fairly and openly as competitors in Trade,' and 'studiously avoid any
discreditable proceeding which might tarnish the reputation of the Honble

Coy.' " McLoughlin "was convinced that the Bostonian's venture would
soon collapse, and he feared that if he refused supplies, the resourceful

New Englander might bring in goods from some other source. So he de
cided to deal with Wyeth as a new outlet and accepted the proposal, but
retained trapping rights in the valuable Flathead Country." McLoughlin
would later write to a disgruntled Simpson: "Mr. Wyeth ... told me that
he did not come to oppose us, if we would put no obstacles in the way of his

trading Horses in the Interior or Salmon there, as his object was to salt
Salmon for exportation, and to deal with the American Trappers in the
Snake Country."68

W

YETH NEVER RECEIVED FORMAL approval from
Simpson. Instead, he skirted official permission from the

Governor and Committee and established a small trad

ing station ? Fort William ? at Warrior Point on the
northern end of Sauvie Island at the confluence of the Columbia and

Willamette rivers. A second, more ambitious post was built on "Lewis
River" ? the Snake ? well to the south of any others in the HBC's trading
sphere.69 Within sight of the Union Jack and under the watchful but coop

erative eyes of Thomas McKay, the leader of the Company's Snake River
Brigade of 1834-1835, Wyeth built Fort Hall, his proverbial "stone in the
garden," near the junction of the Portneuf and Snake rivers in present-day

Idaho. The palisades and two bastions were completed on August 6, "on
which day the Am. Standard was raised in regions remote from its usual
habitation and amid the noise of revelry and gun powder it floated in the
gaze of the astonished Savages." A week later, Wyeth departed to the mouth

of the Columbia to meet his ship, the May Dacre, leaving manager Robert
Evans and eleven men at the new fort.70

The "Savages" Wyeth described were part of Thomas McKay's HBC
brigade; and in McKay, Wyeth met his match at entrepreneurship. De
scribed by George Simpson as "a half breed of the Saulteaux Tribe ... one
of the best Shots in the Country and very cool and resolute among Indi
ans, [McKay] has always been employed on the most desperate service in
the Columbia and the more desperate it is the better he likes it." John Kirk

Townsend, an ornithologist who accompanied Wyeth, described the scene:
"We found Mr. McKay's company encamped on the bank of the river within

a few hundred yards of our tents. It consists of thirty men, thirteen of

whom are Indians, Nez Perces, Chinooks and Kayouse [Cayuse], with a

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the N

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

few squaws. The remainder are French-Canadians and half-breeds."71 In
Wyeth's absence, McKay would soon enter into his own private deals with

Wyeth's partners.
Within months it was apparent that the plan of a salmon and fur enter
prise, each dependent on the other and both linked to perfect timing by
land and by water, was flawed. Capt. Joseph Thing and Wyeth had similar

visions but very different management styles, and a dozen Hawaiian la
borers under Thing's supervision deserted by the winter of 1835. The prob

lems piled up. The May Dacre arrived on the Columbia three months late
owing to damage from lightning at sea. By then, the salmon run had passed,

and Wyeth's empty barrels were useless, at least for a year, so he loaded the

ship with lumber to trade in Hawaii. He wrote his brother: "If at the close
of next year our prospects are not brighter you may expect to see me back

again, following with fresh spirits some new or old plans of profit or im

provement."72
At Fort Hall, according to one employee, Evans "partook too freely of
the spirituous Liquors and kept a very loose account of the property en

trusted to him." Such behavior prompted Wyeth to replace Evans with
Thing. To keep the men busy and on speculation of making more in furs
than fish, Thing entered into partnership with Thomas McKay to form a
"Flat head country expedition" designed to build a new post in the Salmon

River country. This and subsequent trapping parties were attacked by
Blackfeet, forcing contraction rather than expansion of fur-gathering ac
tivities. McKay was instructed to spend the winter along the River Boise,
where he built a fort in the fall of 1834 a considerable distance downstream
from Fort Hall. Both American visitors and HBC officials saw the fort ?
first known as Snake Fort ? as McKay's private venture, not official Com
pany property, even though McKay held the rank of clerk within the orga

nization. In 1837, the post was renamed Fort Boise, for the Big Wood
River, and was subsumed into the Bay Company's official list of Columbia
District properties, with McKay in charge.73 By then, Wyeth was out of

resources, and he retreated to Boston in 1837. Fort Hall and all of the
property within its walls were sold to the HBC.
Both forts improved their fortunes after 1838, at which time Fort Hall

was added to the Snake Country Department. Despite decline in fur re
turns across the interior Mountain West, fur-return profits from the Snake

Country rose from ?250 in 1838 to ?1,673 in 1839 and ?2,400 in 1842. British

good fortune in the Columbia Department improved as Americans
struggled to keep the rendezvous system alive. Cornelius Rogers, a lay

504 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

QHS neg., QrHi 803

This hand-colored lithograph of Fort Vancouver in 1845 was based on a sketch by Henry

James Wane, a young British army lieutenant who visited several forts and settlements in
the Oregon Country during his seven-month journey in 1845-1846.

missionary bound for Henry Spalding's Lapwai Mission, wrote from the
Wind River Mountains in July 1838, describing the rendezvous: "The Ameri

can Fur Company must soon abandon the mountains. The trade is un
profitable, and the men are becoming dissatisfied; besides, the Hudson
Bay Company will break down all opposition. Their resources are bound
less, and they stop at no expense."74

Most historians have interpreted the completion of these two small
posts as American and British first and second punches in the economic
and diplomatic war that escalated into the 1840s.75 In 1847, after the Treaty

of Washington had settled the boundary dispute, Wyeth revised the expla
nation of his misfortunes, reconciling himself a victim of "the commercial
distress of that time." In 1839, however, he had blamed HBC's refusal to

honor the joint occupation agreement of 1818, which provided Congress
and the American reading public fuel to feed the fires of expansionism in
the Northwest.76

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 505

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Beginning with Washington Irving in 1839 and culminating with H.H.
Bancroft's influential 1886 History of Oregon, Wyeth's story was transformed

from one of special privilege to one that depicted him as a victim of inter

national struggle. Bancroft wrote:
... Wyeth's purpose was not settlement, but traffic_As this did not suit the gentle

men of the Hudson's Bay Company, who were strong in land and desired the con
tinuance of their monopoly, but who were without the political right to drive out the

people of the United States while entertaining them hospitably, as a rule, at Fort
Vancouver, they so circumscribed and defeated their business efforts in this quarter
that Wyeth among others was finally forced to sell to them and retire from the field.77

Bradford Cole questions this interpretation: "Although Fort Boise evolved
into the Hudson's Bay Company's competitor to Fort Hall," he concludes,
"McKay's original intent is not totally clear." Cole also finds compelling
evidence in the "Henry Hall Letter Book" that Wyeth was more the victim

of bad timing, overly ambitious schemes, and personnel problems than
HBC opposition, at least at the district and local levels.78
Wyeth expressed some gratification that his efforts in 1834 had a lasting

legacy in that "19 of those who then accompanied me including the mis

sionaries remained permanently in the country," part of the American
phalanx that would call for the U.S. takeover of Oregon by the late 1830s.

Overall, his long-term plan failed to bridge American free enterprise in
the central Rockies with HBC activities in the Northwest through fish and

furs, but his enterprises opened the door for a greater threat to both the

Hudson's Bay Company and American fur-trade entrepreneurs. Ameri
can farmers and zealous missionaries were willing to accept HBC largess

but were ideologically committed to a change of flags and religious de
nominations.79
Even before Wyeth had submitted his 1839 memorial to Congress, thirty

six residents had signed their own petition calling for the United States to

take "formal and speedy possession" of Oregon. The "Oregon Memorial"

built on a 1837 report to Congress by naval officer William A. Slacum.

Slacum had sailed the brig Loriot into the Columbia on December 22,
1836, to investigate brashly with scrupulous detail the activities of the Brit
ish and the resident Americans. Since "the coalition, in 1821," he declared,

"the now Hudson Bay Company have extended their enterprises over an
extent of country almost incalculable." In a jingoistic tone consistent with
the administration that had sent him on his mission, Slacum made a case
for liberating Americans and the retired "Canadian settlers" who had for

merly served the Company and who were now on the Willamette, "al

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

though freemen in every sense of the word still subject to the protection and

authority, otherwise thraldom of the Hudson Bay Company." He concluded:

"this monopoly is very wealthy; and when the question of our western
lines of territory is settled, they (the Hudson Bay Company) will make the

most strenuous efforts to retain free navigation of the Columbia ? more
important to them than the free navigation of the St. Lawrence is to the
people of the United States."80

With Slacum's document in hand and spurred on by Jason Lee, the
most ardent champion of American takeover, PL. Edwards drafted the
document. Ten of the signers were attached to the Protestant mission en
terprises in Oregon, seventeen were American citizens who resided near

mission stations, and nine were French Canadians in residence or in re
tirement at Champoeg or French Prairie. Far less critical than Slacum, the

"Memorial" extolled the "commercial advantages of the territory" and its

"happy position for trade with China, India, and the western coasts of
America." Edwards predicted a lively exchange with Hawaii and other
exotic ports for beef and flour from Oregon farms. The document in
cluded no outright accusations of mistreatment but focused on "the feel

ing of dependence on the Hudson's Bay Company, and to their moral

influence."81

The "Memorial" was a good nudge, but Congress and the State Depart
ment were not ready to move. Edwards would write his own reason why
Americans should take to the Oregon Trail in the next few years. His Emi
grants' Guide in 1842 gave its readers a glowing report of the prospects of
growing fruit, "even grapes," grains that "have never failed, or been af
fected by blight, weevil or mildew," and soils where "there is but little dif

ference in the produce of grain sown in the spring and that sown in the

fall." In short, "in no country in the world may the husbandman look
forward with more assurance to the reward of his toil."82

Other voices new to Oregon in 1842-1845 shared
I Edwards's enthusiasm. In 1843,as American settlers poured

r into the Oregon Country, the HBC moved its Columbia De

partment headquarters from Vancouver to Victoria, antici
pating the "monstrous treaty" that would end the Company's hegemony
of the region. During the transition, the older posts continued to serve as

general stores to Americans and Canadians alike, supplying a larger vol
ume of axes, plows, and hammers than traps, blankets, or trade goods to
the new clientele. Rufus Sage, a mountain man who visited the region in
1842, reported: "The agents of the Hudson Bay Company at present are of

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 507

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

great advantage to emigrants. They extend to them every reasonable assis

tance by selling goods and necessaries at very low prices, and receiving
their various products in payment upon most favorable terms."83
On the eve of the final negotiations leading to the Treaty of Washing
ton, John Dunn, a former Bay Company employee who spent eight years

on the Columbia, saw the irony in the new power relationship. In The
Oregon Territory and the British North American Fur Trade, published in
London in 1844 and reissued in Philadelphia in 1845, Dunn wrote:
The object of the Americans is to have the dominion of the whole continent, from the

Atlantic to the Pacific; and to exclude all Europeans, especially British subjects, from

all habitation there. This they do not disguise: indeed, they are every day growing
bolder, and more exclusive in their tone.84

Nevertheless, Dunn proclaimed, "The Hudson's Bay Company... exercises
almost absolute sway over the whole of the northwest of America, and it

may be averred, also over the Oregon country. Their power is the only
civilized power known to the Indians which they show any disposition to
yield to, or even respect." In 1845, the British government sent lieutentants

Henry Warre and and Mervin Vavasour, Royal Engineers, to determine
the status of readiness should the Oregon question not be resolved peace
fully by treaty. Warre described John McLoughlin as "settled on a beauti

ful farm... in a "very comfortable log Cabin, Barns, &c. and with his
Indian Wife appears quite satisfied with his lot and apparently intent upon

making his way among the Yankees, by whom he is surrounded."85 Warre
blasted McLoughlin for what he saw in Oregon:
We are convinced that without their [HBC] assistance not 30 families would now
have been in the settlement the first Immigration in 1841 or 1842 arrived in so miser

able a Condition that had it not been for the trading posts of the Hudson's Bay
Company they must have starved or been cut off by the Indians ... their numbers

have Increased so Rapidly that the British party are now in the Minority.... Their
Lands are Invaded themselves insulted and they now Require the protection of the
British Government against the Very people to the Introduction of whom they have

been more than Accessory."86

Infuriated by Warre's report, McLoughlin wrote a lengthy reply, refuting

the accusations, denying most outright, and adding: "... as a Good and
faithful Subject it was my Duty to do my Utmost to maintain peace and
order Between the British Subjects and American Citizens...." Later that

year, McLoughlin was informed that the Company planned to transfer
him to a post east of the Rockies at a reduced salary. Enough was enough.
He resigned, retiring to his home in Oregon City, but not before writing

OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

the governor of the HBC: "I have Drunk and am Drinking the cup of Bit
terness to the very Dregs."87

During the years of Provisional Government, from 1843 to 1849, and
prior to the arrival of Governor Joseph Lane, Oregon was unique in the
coalition that combined to organize a successful government.88 Described

by John McLoughlin as "merely a union of certain parties, British and
American subjects, being divested of all nationality of character, having

no national objects in view, and its exclusive aim and purpose being the
protection of persons and property," historians still discuss the motives
and levels of support that led to division at the forty-ninth parallel.89 Most

recently, it has become clear that despite saber rattles from the Polk ad

ministration and Lord Aberdeen's polite but forceful rejections of the
American demand of lands south of "54'4o?," England was disinterested in

another boxing match with Americans on the Columbia. Both nations
were satisfied with the treaty.90 As historian Herman Deutsch concludes,
the real winner was the settler; the immediate loser was the fur trader,
American as well as British; and the ultimate victims were Native peoples,
whose lands and resources would soon be severely compromised. The treaty
said nothing about Indian rights but guaranteed navigation and trading
rights to the HBC "and to all British subjects trading with the same" on the

Columbia. Possessory rights of the HBC "and of all British subjects who
may be already in the occupation of land or other property lawfully ac
quired" was affirmed, as were farms, land, and other property belonging
to the Puget's Sound Agricultural Company, a subsidiary of the HBC and
the largest farming enterprise in the region. Finally, the United States re

served the right to take possession of any British holdings "of public and
political importance ... at a proper valuation, to be agreed upon between
the parties."91

In 1847, Governor Simpson estimated the HBC's holdings within the
American sector (exclusive of rights to navigate on the Columbia River)
worth ?466,400, or $2,230,oo.92 Three years earlier, one French Canadian

missionary estimated the "Canadian population, countrywomen and chil
dren, is about 1,000 souls, distributed about as follows: 600 at Willamette,
100 at Vancouver, 100 at Cowlitz; the rest are scattered at the various posts
of the Company." At the time of ratification of the Treaty of Washington,

four hundred Bay Company employees were listed on the company pay
roll in the "Oregon Country." By nationality or ethnicity, they were enu

merated as 70 French Canadians, 11 Iroquois Indians, 42 "half breeds or
men with some Indian blood," 152 "Sandwich Islanders," 40 Englishmen, 10
Canadians "of British origin," 17 mainland Scots, 26 Orkadians, 21 Hebre

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 509

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

dians, 10 others from various islands of Scotland, and one Frenchman.93
Some would continue to work for the Bay Company, which exercised its
right to trade and commerce at Fort Vancouver until i860, after which the

post was closed and the structures deteriorated rapidly. A few would leave

for Vancouver Island and other Bay Company posts or return to their
place of origin. Still others would stay and live out their lives with the new

American settlers at Oregon City, Champoeg, and French Prairie.94
Americans had entered the period of joint occupancy with a glimmer

of knowledge of the Bay Company's presence to the north and west of
American interests. By the 1830s, a few entrepreneurs had focused on the

natural resources of the region under HBC domination. They were fol
lowed by missionary organizations that combined interests with coloni
zation societies determined to gain American access to the region. Public
perceptions of the Bay Company remained mixed from the merger with
the North West Company in 1821 through the early years of provisional
government in the 1840s. Despite the best efforts of John McLoughlin and

his officers to accommodate all interest groups, by 1846 the hegemony of
the Leviathan of the North had been broken. Thereafter, the Company's
presence would continue in the region as late as 1871, but for most Ameri
cans it had returned "back home" to its British origins.95

Notes
This article developed out of a paper first pre
sented at the Rupert's Land Research Centre

Colloquium in Edmonton, 1994. The author
wishes to acknowledge the assistance of John

C. Ewers (1910-1997), whose advice and re
search notes better informed this study; and

David D. Smythe of Parks Canada, who recently
completed his dissertation at Carleton Univer
sity in an area of critical concern to this study.
I am grateful to Smythe for sharing his work

with me. The author also acknowledges the
editorial assistance of Marianne Keddington
Lang and Joy Margheim, editors of OHQ; Janet
Fireman, editor of California History; and Janet

Lecompte, an independent historian in Mos

cow, Idaho.

1. Maximilian, Prince of Wied, Travels in
the Interior of North America, 1832-1834 (Coblenz,

2. Maximilian, Travels in the Interior, in
Thwaites, ed., Early Western Travels, 23:134. See
also John C. Ewers, The Blackfeet: Raiders on the

Northwestern Plains (Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press, 1958), 60-3. Engag?s were la
borers who "engaged" themselves under con
tract for specific terms of service. The vast ma
jority of fur-trade personnel who worked for

Anglo-American, Canadian, or British firms
were in this category and were often called the
voyageur class. See William Swagerty, "A View

from the Bottom Up: The Workforce of the
American Fur Company on the Missouri in the
1830s," Montana, the Magazine of Western His
tory 43:1 (i993):i8-33.
3. The Blackfoot in historic times have dis
tinguished themselves in three groups or tribes:

the Blackfoot proper, who occupied central

1839), reprinted in Early Western Travels, 1748

Alberta; the Blood of southern Alberta; and the

Ohio: Arthur H. Clark, 1906), 23:127-8. On the

Piegan, who consisted of two major communi
ties, one on the Canadian side of the border

Thwaites, Early Western Travels, 23:314^274.

(Peigan) and the other in north-central Mon
tana (Piegan or Blackfeet). Collectively, they

1846, ed. Reuben Gold Thwaites (Cleveland,

life of David D. Mitchell (1806-1861), see

510 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

call themselves Niitsitapi. See Hugh Dempsey,

torical Society, 1961); Hiram M. Chittenden,

"Blackfoot," in Plains, ed. Raymond J. DeMallie,

The American Fur Trade of the Far West, vol. 1

Handbook of North American Indians, vol. 13,
pt. 1 (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institu
tion, 2001), 604-28.
4. Maximilian, Travels in the Interior, in

(New York: Francis P. Harper, 1902), chaps. 4
and 21; E.E. Rich, Hudsons Bay Company: 1670
1870, vol. 3 (i960; reprint, Toronto: McClelland

Thwaites, ed., Early Western Travels, 23:135.

Phillips, with J.W. Smurr, The Fur Trade, vol. 2
(Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1961),

5. Ibid., 138-40.
6. Ibid., 140.
7. Ibid., 145.

and Stewart, i960), chap. 22; Paul Chrisler

chap. 46; LeRoy R. Hafen, "A Brief History of
the Fur Trade of the Far West," in Mountain

8. Ewers, The Blackfeet, 63.

Men, 1:1-176, esp. 41-57; Wishart, Fur Trade of

9. J.E. Harriott, in Fred Stenson, Rocky

Canada, 1985), 70; Hugh A. Dempsey, "A His
tory of Rocky Mountain House," in Canadian

the American West; Eugene Y. Arima, Blackfeet
and Palefaces: The Pikani and Rocky Mountain
House: A Commemorative History from the Up
per Sas-kacheway and Missouri Fur Trade (Ot
tawa: Golden Dog Press, 1995); David Smythe,

Historic Sites: Occasional Papers in Archaeology
6 (Ottawa: National Historic Sites Service, Na
tional and Historic Parks Branch, Dept. of In

Watching: The Hudson's Bay Company and the
American Fur Trade on the Upper Missouri, to

Mountain House National Historic Park (To
ronto: New Canada Publications for Parks

"'The Leviathan Company of the North' is

dian Affairs and Northern Development, 1973), 9.

1831," in Indians & Traders: Entrepreneurs of the

Mitchell, Fort Union, January 21, 1834, "Fort

Upper Missouri: Fort Union Fur Trade Sympo
sium Proceedings, 2000 (Wiliston, N.D.: Fort
Union Association, 2001), 73-92; Smythe, "The

10. Kenneth McKenzie to David D.

Union Letterbook," fol. 24, Chouteau Collec

Niitsitapi Trade: Euroamerians and the

tion, Missouri Historical Society, St. Louis [here

after Chouteau Collection].

11. See Ray H. Mattison, "Kenneth

Blackfoot-Speaking Peoples, to the Mid-i830s"
(Ph.D. diss., Carleton University, 2001); John

McKenzie," in Mountain Men and the Fur Trade

C. Jackson, The Piikani Blackfeet: A Culture under

of the Far West, ed. LeRoy R. Hafen (Glendale,
Calif.: Arthur H. Clark, 1968-1972), 2:217-24.

Siege (Missoula, Mont.: Mountain Press, 2000).
18. Albert K. Weinberg, Manifest Destiny:
A Study of Nationalist Expansionism in Ameri
can History (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer
sity Press, 1935); William H. Goetzmann, When
the Eagle Screamed: The Diplomatic Horizon in

12. "Kenneth McKenzie," biographical file,

Hudson's Bay Company Archives, Manitoba
Provincial Archives, Winnipeg. Also see Erwin

N. Thompson, Fort Union Trading Post: Fur
Trade Empire on the Upper Missouri (Medora,
N.D.: Theodore Roosevelt Nature and History
Association, 1986).
13. See Janet Lecompte, "Pierre Chouteau,
Jr.," in Hafen, ed., Mountain Men, 9:91-123. See

also Lecompte, "The Chouteaus and the St.
Louis Fur Trade," in Papers of the St. Louis Fur
Trade, ed. W.R. Swagerty (Bethesda, Md.: Univer
sity Publications of America, 1991), xiii-xx.
14. Kenneth McKenzie to Pierre Chouteau,
Jr., Fort Union, March 20, 1834, "Fort Union
Letterbook," fol. 43, Chouteau Collection.

15. Elliott Coues compiled these figures

from the manuscript journals of Charles

Larpenteur. See Elliott Coues, ed., Forty Years a
Fur Trader on the Upper Missouri: The Personal
Narrative of Charles Larpenteur, 1833-1872 (New
York: Francis P. Harper, 1898), 1:78-9. For com

parative data from 1834-1835, see David J.
Wishart, The Fur Trade of the American West,
1807-1840: A Geographical Synthesis (Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press, 1979), 58-9.
16. Ewers, The Blackfeet, 64.
17. See Bruce LeRoy, ed., H.M. Chittenden:
A Western Epic (Tacoma: Washington State His

American Diplomacy, 1800-1860 (New York: John

Wiley and Sons, 1966).
19. See Kenneth Wiggins Porter, John Jacob

Astor: Businessman, 2 vols. (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1931); John Denis
Haeger, John Jacob Astor: Business and Finance
in the Early Republic (Detroit, Mich.: Wayne
State University Press, 1991), i28ff; James P.
Ronda, Astoria & Empire (Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press, 1990), 258ff; Frederick Merk,

The Oregon Question: Essays in Anglo-Ameri
can Diplomacy and Politics (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1967), 8-10, 20-1;

John Jacob Astor to Wilson Price Hunt, Janu
ary 2, 1832, Astor Papers, Beinecke Rare Book
and Manuscript Library, Yale University, New

Haven, Conn.

20. U.S. Congress, "An act supplementary
to the act passed the thirtieth of March, one
thousand eight hundred and two, to regulate
trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes,
and to preserve the frontiers," 14th Cong., ist
sess., chap. 165, 1816, in Public Statutes at Large
of the United States of America, ed. Richard Pe
ters (Boston: Little Brown, 1861), 3:332. From an

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 511

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

American perspective, the best study remains bia Press, 1997). Other pertinent documents
Samuel Flagg Bemis, Jay s Treaty: A Study in are found in B.C. Payette, comp., The Oregon
Commerce and Diplomacy (New Haven, Conn.: Country under the Union Jack: A Reference Book
Yale University Press, 1962); 455-8. For a Cana of Historical Documents for Scholars and Histo
rians (Montreal: Payette Radio, 1962).
dian perspective, see A.L. Burt, The United States,
27. Francis Paul Prucha, American Indian
Great Britain, and British North America (New
Policy in the Formative Years: The Indian Trade
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1940).
21. "John C. Calhoun to Thomas Smith," and Intercourse Acts, 1790-1834 (Cambridge,
Department of War, March 16, 1818, reprinted Mass: Harvard University Press, 1962), 89-90,
in The Missouri Expedition, 1818-1820: The Jour

108-10.

nal of Surgeon John Gale with Related Docu
ments, ed. Roger L. Nichols (Norman: Univer
sity of Oklahoma Press, 1969), 89-90. Also see

economic power during the critical years, 1815
1819 in John Jacob Astor, chap. 7, esp. 191-2.

Edgar B. Wesley, "A Still Larger View of the So

Also see Ronda, Astoria & Empire, chap. 10.

Called Yellowstone Expedition," North Dakota
Historical Quarterly 5 (July 1931): 219-20.

28. Haeger outlines Astor's political and

29. Anthony McGinnis, Counting Coup and
Cutting Horses: Intertribal Warfare on the North

22. Roger L. Nichols, General Henry ern Plains, 1738-1889 (Evergreen, Colo.: Cor

dillera Press, 1990). See also David J. Wishart,
Atkinson: A Western Military Career (Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1965), 47-68. See The Fur Trade of the American West, 1807-1840:
Gerald Friesen in The Canadian Prairies: A His A Geographical Synthesis (Lincoln: University
tory (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1987),

esp. 79-83; and John Morgan Gray, Lord Selkirk

of Nebraska Press, 1979); W.R. Swagerty, "In
dian Trade of the Trans-Mississippi West to

1870," in Indian-White Relations, ed. Wilcomb
of Red River (Toronto: MacMillan of Canada,
1963). Priorities of the Northern Council are Washburn, Handbook of North American Indi
summarized in Rich, Hudsons Bay Company, ans (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution,
1988), 4:351-74.
2:256fr
23. Article III, Convention signed at Lon
30. No study of these highly restrictive tar
don, October 20, 1818, 8 Stat. 248; Treaty Series
iffs has been attempted, but there is no ques
112; reprinted in Treaties and Other International
Agreements of the United States of America, 1776

1949, comp. Charles I. Bevans. Department of
State Publication 8761 (Washington, D.C.: GPO,

1974), 12:57-60. The treaty is summarized in
Alexander DeConde, A History of American
Foreign Policy (New York: Charles Scribner's

Sons, 1963), 115. The Convention was extended
indefinitely in 1827 (8 Stat. 360; Treaty Series
116, in Treaties, comp. Bevans, 12:74-5).
24. "Andrew Jackson to Henry Atkinson,

Headquarters, Nashville, Tennessee, May 15,
1819," in The Missouri Expedition, 95-6.

25. A summary of American attitudes is

tion that tariffs were generally detrimental to

American fur-trade interests. The tariff of 1816,

enacted in 1815 and effective March 1, 1816,
removed the surcharge on goods delivered in
British vessels but imposed a 42 percent gen
eral duty on "foreign goods, wares, and mer
chandise." Specific items were amended under
subsequent acts reflecting successful lobbying
of Congress by interest groups, including fur
companies, and the status of American manu
facturing. For example, the 1816 general tariff

was modified to accommodate reduction on

"hempen cloth, or sail cloth . . . stockings of

The Making of Oregon: A Study in Historical
Geography (Portland: Oregon Historical Soci

wool or cotton; printing types, all articles manu
factured from brass, copper, iron, steel, pewter,
lead or tin ... brass wire, cutlery, pins, needles,
buttons, button moulds and buckles of all kinds,

ety, 1979), chap. 1.

gilt, plated and japanned wares of all kinds:

found in Samuel N. Dicken and Emily F. Dicken,

26. Francis D. Haines, Jr., "The Relations

of the Hudson's Bay Company with the Ameri
can Fur Traders in the Pacific Northwest," Pa

cific Northwest Quarterly 40:4 (1949): 273-94.
The classic in-depth study that treats the HBC as
an extension of the British "state" remains John

S. Galbraith, The Hudsons Bay Company as an
Imperial Factor, 1821-1869 (Toronto: University

of Toronto Press, 1957). Also see Richard
Somerset Mackie, Trading beyond the Moun
tains: The British Fur Trade on the Pacific, 1793
1843 (Vancouver: University of British Colum

cannon, muskets, fire arms and side arms; Prus
sian blue, china ware, earthen ware, stone ware,

porcelain and glass manufactures, other than
window glass and black glass quart bottles" at a
20 percent duty. All woolen and cotton manu
factures, "excepting blankets, woollen rugs and

worsted or stuff goods," carried a 25 percent
tariff until June 1819, after which they too would

cost the importer 20 percent. Furs "undressed,
of all kinds, raw hides and skins," were exempt
from any duty. See U.S. Congress, Act of April
27, 1816, chap. 107, 14th Cong., ist sess., chap.

512 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

?o; Statute I, April 27, 1816, chap. 107; and "An War, New York, 25 November, 1831," 77; Will
Act concerning the convention to regulate the iam Gordon, "Mr. Gordon's report to the Sec
commerce between the territories of the United retary of War relative to the Fur Trade, St. Louis,
States and his Britannie Majesty," March 1, 1816,
chap. 22, in Public Statutes at Large, 3:253-5.

Oct. 3, 1831," 29; and John Dougherty, "The Fur
Trade on the Missouri and its waters, including

31. Lancaster Pollard, ed., "1830 Report on the Rocky Mountains, commencing 1815, and
the Fur Trade by General William Clark," Or ending 1830," in Message from the President
(1832), 53.
egon Historical Quarterly 48:1 (1947): 26.
42. "Tabular Statement showing the num
32. This subject is explored in Thomas F.
ber and names of American citizens who have
Schilz, "Robes, Rum, and Rifles: Indian Middle
men in the Northern Plains Fur Trade," Mon been killed or robbed while engaged in the Fur
tana, the Magazine of Western History 40 (Win Trade, or the Inland Trade to Mexico, since the
late war with Great Britain;" 81-6; "From Mr.
ter 1990): 3-13. See also Smythe, "'The Levia
than Company of the North' is Watching."
Dougherty, with statements, relating to the Fur
33. "The Fur Trade," St. Louis Enquirer, re Trade, &c, Upper Missouri Agency, Canton
printed in Franklin, Missouri Intelligencer, Sep ment Leavenworth, Oct. 25, 1831," in Message
tember 17, 1822, and The West of William H. from the President (1832), 51-3.
Ashley... 1822-1838, ed. Dale L. Morgan (Den
43. Ramsay Crooks (1787-1859) immigrated
to the U.S. in 1803 and was one of the founders
ver: Old West Publishing Company, 1964), 19.

34. "Letter by One of Ashley's Men to a of Astoria. He rose rapidly within the AFC, be

Friend in the District of Columbia, Fort Kiawa,

coming general manager in 1817 and president
upon Astor's retirement in 1834. In 1825, he
ten miles below the Big Bend of the Missouri,
June 17th, 1823," in Morgan, ed., West of Will married Marianne P?lagie Emilie Pratte, con
iam H. Ashley, 31-3.
necting the AFC directly with Pratte, Chouteau
35. Roger L. Nichols, "Backdrop for Disas & Co. of St. Louis. See Harvey L. Carter, "Ramsay
ter: Causes of the Arikara War of 1823," South Crooks," in Hafen, ed., Mountain Men, 9:125
31. See also David Lavender, The Fist in the
Dakota History 14 (Summer 1984): 93-114.
36. Missouri Advocate and St. Louis Enquirer,

Wilderness (1964; reprint, Albuquerque: Uni

October 8, 1825," in Morgan, ed., West of Will
iam H. Ashley, 137.
37. "The Ashley Narrative," in ibid., 118;

versity of New Mexico Press, 1979).

Frederick Merk, "Snake Country Expedition,

west to 1857 (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart,

1824-25: An Episode of Fur Trade and Empire,"
Oregon Historical Quarterly 35:2 (1934): 93-122;

the 1883 agreement, I have relied on Grace Nute's

44. For a discussion of the Agreement of
1833, see E.E. Rich, The Fur Trade and the North

1967), 254-5. For documents on extension of

"William H. Ashley to Joseph Charless, St. summaries in Calendar of the American Fur
Louis, June 5, 1827," in Morgan, ed., West of Company Papers, in Annual Report of the Ameri
William H. Ashley, 165-6.
can Historical Association for the year 1944, pt. 1
38. "Missouri Observer, St. Louis, October (1831-1840): 109 (1834); 1951, 1979 (1836); 3503
17, 1827," in Morgan, ed., West of William H.

(1837); 7660, 8138 (1840); pt. 2 (1841-1849), items

Ashley, 175-6.

11,015, 11,419, 11,671 (1841); 12,911 (1842); 14,217,

39. William Gordon to the Secretary of War
relative to the Fur Trade, St. Louis, October 3,

14,277 (1844); 16,357 (1847).

1831, in Message from the President of the United

Lampson to the New York Office of the AFC
with market information is from "Wildes and

States . . . With a resolution of the Senate con
cerning the Fur Trade, and Inland Trade to Mexico

[March 5, 1832], 22d Cong., ist sess., S.Doc. 90
(Serial 213), 27.
40. William H. Ashley to J. H. Eaton, "Brit
ish Establishments on the Columbia and the

State of the Fur Trade," January 24, 1831, in
Message from the President of the United States,
In Answer to a resolution of the Senate relative to
the British establishments on the Columbia, and

45. The earliest correspondence from
Company, London, to A.F.C. Office, New York,"
January 30, 1835, in Nute, comp., Calendar, pt.
1, item 198. For biographical data, see the "CM.

Lampson Biographical File," HBC Archives,
Winnipeg. See especially "Early Years of Sir
Curtis Miranda Lampson," A.5/0, fol. i24d; A.15/
3-> P- 459- Also see Arthur J. Ray, The Fur Trade

21st Cong., 2d sess., S.Doc. 39 (Serial 203), re

in the Industrial Age (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1990), 97.
46. Dozens of letters were received from
Lampson between 1835 and 1849. See Nute,

printed, ed. Donald R. Johnson (Fairfield, Wash.

comp., "Index," Calendar, pt. 2, 1831-1836. Let

Ye Galleon Press, 1981), 24-9.
41. "William B. Astor to the Secretary of

1840s and 1850s are especially rich in informa

the state of the fur trade, &c. [January 26, 1831],

ters to Pierre Chouteau, Jr. & Co. from the

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 513

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

tion on HBC sales. See, for example, CM.

egon Territory," New-England Magazine 2 (April

Lampson to P. Chouteau, Jr. & Co., London,
January 18, 1845, Chouteau Collection, Mis
souri Historical Society.

Columbia, 96.

47. "Office of the American Fur Company,

1832): 320-6, reprinted in Hulbert, Call of the
51. The Correspondence and Journals of Cap

tain Nathaniel J. Wyeth, 1831-6: A Record of Two

New York, 3 February, 1838, to William Brewster,

Expeditions for the Occupation of the Oregon

Detroit," American Fur Company Papers, Calen
dar, pt. 1, item 3947; Microfilm edition, New
York Historical Society (New York City), 37 reels
(1951-1953), reel 3, Letterbook 7:17-18.

Country, in Sources of the History of Oregon, ed.

EG. Young, vol. 1 (Eugene: University of Or

egon Press, 1899), 1:176-7. Also found in

Hulbert, Call of the Columbia (1934), 152-3. On
48. This theme is explored in Malcolm Wyeth's enterprises, see Richard G. Beidleman,
Clark, Jr., Eden Seekers: The Settlement of Or
"Nathaniel Wyeth's Fort Hall," Oregon Histori
egon, 1818-1862 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
cal Quarterly 58 (September 1957): 197-250; Wil
1981). For a balanced overview of the period,
liam R. Sampson, "Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth," in
see Gordon B. Dodds, The American North Hafen, ed., Mountain Men, 5:381-401. See also

west: A History of Oregon and Washington (Ar Haines, "Relations of the Hudson's Bay Com
lington Heights, IL: Forum Press, 1986), chaps.
pany."
3-5. See also Merk, The Oregon Question.
52. The "Umpqua Massacre" is best docu
49. Hall J. Kelley, A General Circular to all mented in Dale L. Morgan, Jedediah Smith and
Persons of Good Character, who wish to Emigrate

the Opening of the West (Indianapolis: Bobbs

to the Oregon Territory (Charlestown: William Merrill, 1953), chap. 13. For the formal arrange
W. Wheildon, 1831), reprinted in Hall J. Kelley ment between Simpson and Smith, see "Gover
on Oregon: A Collection of five of his published nor Simpson to Jedidiah [sic] S. Smith, Ft.
works and a number of hitherto unpublished let Vancouver, 29 Dec, 1828," in Fur Trade and
ters, ed. Fred Wilbur Powell (Princeton, N.J.: Empire: George Simpson's Journal. . . together
Princeton University Press, 1932), 76. Kelley, A with Accompanying Documents, ed. Frederick
Narrative of the Events and Difficulties in the Merk (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Colonization of Oregon (Boston: Thurston, Torry Press, 1931), 306-7.
& Emerson, 1852), in ibid., 180. On Kelley, see
53. "Governor Simpson to Major Pilcher,
Archer Butler Hulbert, The Call of the Colum Flathead Lake; Ft. Vancouver, February 18,
bia: Iron Men and Saints Take the Oregon Trail,
1829," in Merk, ed., Fur Trade and Empire, 307
Overland to the Pacific Series 4 (Denver: Stewart 8. Also see John E. Sunder, Joshua Pilcher, Fur

Commission of Colorado College and the Den
ver Public Library, 1934), 1-104. Others who
complained about the power of HBC officials
included Ewing Young and Thomas Jefferson
Farnham, both former trader/trappers who

Trader and Indian Agent (Norman: University
of Oklahoma Press, 1968), 67-83.

54. Edgeley W. Todd, "Benjamin Bonne
ville," Hafen, ed., Mountain Men, 5:45-63; Capt.

Benjamin Louis Eulalie de Bonneville to Major
General Macomb, May 21, 1831, Washington,
See Kenneth L. Holmes, Ewing Young: Master D.C., in Washington Irving, The Adventures of
Trapper (Portland, Ore.: Binfords & Mort, 1967). Captain Bonneville, U.S.A. in the Rocky Moun
Farnham extolled the hospitality of the HBC in tains and the Far West, ed. Edgeley W. Todd
settled in the Willamette Valley during the 1830s.

Travels in the Great Western Prairies, the Anahuac

(Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1961),
xxv, 261. See also the discussion in Todd, Ad
and Rocky Mountains, and in the Oregon Coun
try (London, 1843), reprinted in Thwaites, ed., ventures of Captain Bonneville, xxxv-vi.
Early Western Travels, 28-9. Three years earlier,
55. Irving's book first appeared as The Rocky
however, Farnham had predicted that the Brit Mountains: or, scenes, incidents, and adventures
ish government would "cast at its [HBC's] feet
in the Far West; digested from the journal of Capt.
all their aid in a struggle between the two pow B.L.E. Bonneville, of the Army of the United States
(Philadelphia: Carey, Lea & Blanchard, 1837),
ers relative to a Territory so important to them
selves as is Oregon." See Farnham to Dept. of and was later reissued by Irving as The Adven
State, January 4,1840, in Message from the Presi

dent, January 23, 1843, 27th Cong., 3d sess., re
printed in Farnham, History of Oregon Terri
tory, ed. Edward J. Kowrach (Fairfield, Wash.:

Ye Galleon Press, 1981), 93.
50. "[Snelling's] Oregon Territory," New
England Magazine 2 (February 1832): 123-32;
and "[Snelling's] Geographical Sketch of Or

tures of Captain Bonneville U.S.A. See Todd,

ed., Adventures, 261.

56. B.L.E. Bonneville to Lewis Cass, Secre
tary of War, September 30, 1835, Washington
City; and, Bonneville to Major General Macomb,
July 29, 1833, Crow Country, Wind River, in
Todd, ed., Adventures, app. B:393, 382. See also
Edgeley W. Todd, "Benjamin L.E. Bonneville,"

514 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

in Hafen, ed., Mountain Men, 5:45-63;

Fort Hall Copybook, MS. 938-1, Oregon His

torical Society, 5-9. Hall held a 3/16 financial
interest in the company and kept very careful
Lee," Oregon Historical Quarterly 17 (1916): 257, records. The post was named for him. See Ri
266; Narcissa Whitman, letter, March 14, 1838, chard G. Beidleman, "Nathaniel Wyeth's Fort
Wieletpoo, Walla Walla River, Oregon Terri Hall," Oregon Historical Quarterly 58:3 (1959):
tory, in The Letters of Narcissa Whitman, 1836 197-250, 98/14.
1847 (Fairfield, Wash.: Ye Galleon Press, 1986),
65. "Nathl J. Wyeth to Mr. F. Ermatinger,
53; Narcissa Whitman, quoted in Julie Roy Jef Green River, July 18, 1833," in Young, ed., Cor
Chittenden, Fur Trade of the Far West, 1:421-33.

57. F.G. Young, ed., "Diary of Rev. Jason

frey, Converting the West: A Biography of Narcissa

respondence and Journals, 69.

Whitman (Norman: University of Oklahoma

66. "Nath. J. Wyeth to Geo. Simson [sic]
Press, 1991), 92. See Clifford M. Drury, Henry Esq, Boston, Nov. 20, 1833," in ibid., 84. This
Harmon Spalding, Pioneer of Old Oregon (Cald famous quote is attributed to the memory of
well, Idaho: Caxton Printers, 1937); Drury, Joseph L. Meek, whose oral history was used as
Marcus and Narcissa Whitman and the Opening the basis for Frances Fuller Victor's River of the
of Old Oregon (Glendale, Calif.: Arthur H. Clark West: The Adventures of Joe Meek (1871; reprint,
Co., 1973), 1:219-20; and Cornelius J. Brosnan, Missoula, Mont.: Mountain Press Publishing,
1983), 1:164. Wyeth's own recollections of the
Jason Lee: Prophet of New Oregon (New York:
MacMillan, 1932).
event are found in Young, ed., Correspondence
58. John M. Ball to Dr. Brinsmade, January and Journals, 138-9.
67. "Articles of Agreement between the
1, 1833, Fort Vancouver, in Hulbert, Call of the
Columbia, 180.
Hudson's Bay Company and the Columbia River
59. William Stanton, The Great United Fishing and Trading Company," September 27,
States Exploring Expedition of 1838-1842 (Berke 1834, Henry Hall Letter Book, Fort Hall Copy
ley: University of California Press, 1975), 225-6;

Donald Jackson and Mary Lee Spence, eds.,

book, MS. 938-1; McLoughlin to Pierre

Pambrun, October 10, 1834; McLoughlin to

Thomas McKay, October 4, 1834, Hudson's Bay
Company Archives, B-223b/io.
68. Herman J. Deutsch, "The Evolution of
Illinois Press, 1970), 566-7.
60. Chittenden, The American Fur Trade of Territorial and State Boundaries in the Inland

The Expedition of John Charles Fremont, vol. 1:
Travels from 1838 to 1844 (Urbana: University of

the Far West. 1:453.

61. Bradford R. Cole, "Failure on the Co

Empire of the Pacific Northwest," Pacific North

west Quarterly 51:3 (i960): 121; Galbraith, The
lumbia: Nathaniel Wyeth's Columbia River Fish Hudson's Bay Company as an Imperial Factor,
ing and Trading Company," in The Fur Trade 103-4; Dorothy Nafus Morrison, Outpost: John
Revisited: Selected Papers of the Sixth North Ameri McLoughlin and the Far Northwest (Portland:
Oregon Historical Society Press, 1999), 238;
can Fur Trade Conference, Mackinac Island,
Michigan, 1991, ed. Jennifer S.H. Brown et al. McLoughlin to Simpson, March, 3 1835, Hud
son's Bay Company Archives, Provincial Ar
(East Lansing: Michigan State University Press,
1994)> 269-83.
chives of Manitoba, Winnipeg, D.4/127, fol. 70.
69. Wyeth to Col. E.W. Metcalf, Hams Fork
62. The Bay Company produced 3,315 bar
rels of salmon on the Columbia from Novem of the Colorado of the West, June 21, 1834, in
ber 1830 through January 1843, most marketed

in Hawaii, with two shipments to California
and one each to London, Canton, and Boston.

Young, ed., Correspondence and Journals, 136-7.
70. Wyeth to James Brown, October 6,1834,

Columbia River, in ibid., 144. Thomas McKay
(1797-1849/50) was the mixed-blood son of Al
63. Samuel Eliot Morison, "New England exander McKay, who accompanied Alexander

See Mackie, Trading Beyond the Mountains, 197.

and the Opening of the Columbia River Salmon McKenzie in the service of the North West Com
Trade, 1830," Oregon Historical Quarterly 28:2 pany in 1793. Thomas McKay served with the
(1927): 111-32. McLoughlin to John Rowand, Pacific Fur Company, the North West Com
Fort Vancouver, August 3, 1830, quoted in ibid., pany and was retained at the rank of clerk by
115. This epoch is also interpreted by Galbraith, the Hudson's Bay Company after the merger in
The Hudsons Bay Company as Imperial Factor, 1821. See Annie Laurie Bird, "Thomas McKay,"
98-100.
Oregon Historical Quarterly 40 (March 1939): 1
14. Robert Evans, a former employee of Will
64. "Nathaniel J. Wyeth to Geo. Simson
iam Sublette, had been hired for $300 a year in
[sic], Esq, Gov. H.B.C., Fort Colville, March 12,
St. Louis. The other men were each hired for
1833," in Young, ed., Correspondence and Jour
nals, 57; also found as "Copy of proposal to the
Hon. Hudson Bay Co," Henry Hall Letter Book,

$250 a year in Independence. Among their num
ber was John (Osborne) Russell, later a perma

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 515

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

nent settler in Oregon, whose account, Journal

79- Wyeth, "Copy of a Letter. . . ," Decem

print, Portland: Oregon Historical Society Press,
1955) remains the only account left by Wyeth's
men except for official letters and two ledgers

ber 13, 1847, 256. The literature on American
expansion into the Oregon Country is exten
sive. The best studies of American diplomacy
on this remain the works of Frederick Merk,

given to the Oregon Historical Society in the

especially The Oregon Question, and Merk,

of a Trapper, ed. Aubrey L. Haines (1914; re

Manifest Destiny and Mission in American His
"Nathaniel Wyeth's Fort Hall," 213/140.
tory: A Reinterpretation (New York: Vintage,
71. "No. 62, McKay, Thomas," in "The 1963). Also see Weinberg, Manifest Destiny.
'Character Book' of George Simpson, 1832," American expansion into Oregon is quantita
1890s. For a list of the personnel, see Beidleman,

Hudson's Bay Miscellany, 1670-1870, ed. Glyndwr tively analyzed by William A. Bowen, The
Williams (Winnipeg: Hudson's Bay Record So Willamette Valley: Migration and Settlement on
ciety, 1975), 221-2; John Kirk Townsend, Narra
tive of a Journey across the Rocky Mountain, to
the Columbia River (1839; reprint, Lincoln: Uni
versity of Nebraska Press, 1978), 115.

the Oregon Frontier (Seattle: University of Wash

1834, Columbia River, in Young, ed., Corre

ington Press, 1978). The story of both British
and American interest is cast in Clark, Eden
Seekers. The British perspective is best recon
structed in Galbraith, The Hudson's Bay Com
pany as an Imperial Factor. Also see Charles H.

spondence and Journals, 156.

Carey, "British Side of Oregon Question, 1846,"

72. Wyeth to Leonard Wyeth, October 6,

73. Abel Baker to Tucker and Williams, Oregon Historical Quarterly 36:3 (1935): 263-94;
June 17, 1835, Hall Letterbook, 69; J. Neilson and Payette, Oregon under the Union Jack.
80. Cornelius J. Brosnan, ed., "The Or
Barry, "Fort Reed and Fort Boise, 1814-35," Or
egon Historical Quarterly 34 (March-December egon Memorial of 1838," Oregon Historical Quar
terly 34:1 (1933): 75. The official report was
1933): 60-7; H.J. Swinney and Merle W. Wells,
"Fort Boise: from Imperial Outpost to Historic
printed as U.S. House, 25th Cong., 3d sess.,
Site," Idaho Yesterdays 6:1 (1962): 15-39; "Fort H.R. 101, 3, 4, and Supp. Report, 4-7; "Memo
rial of William A. Slacum, December 18, 1837,"
Boise" Vertical File, HBC Archives, Winnipeg.
74. Snake River Returns, HBC Archives, in U.S. Senate, 25th Cong., 2d sess., S.Doc. 470

Swinney and Wells, "Fort Boise," 34; Cornelus

(Serial 318), reprinted as "Memorial of William

Rogers, "The Journey to the Rocky Mountains,"

A. Slacum," Oregon Historical Quarterly 13
(March-December 1912): 177-224; and in fac

Wind River, July 3, 1838, The Oregonian and
Indian's Advocate (Boston, 1838), reprinted in
News of the Plains and Rockies, 1803-1865, vol. 3:
Missionaries, Mormons, Indian Agents, Captives,
ed. David A. White (Spokane, Wash.: Arthur H.

Clark, 1997), 168.
75. For example, Hiram M. Chittenden,
American Fur Trade, 1:450-6; LeRoy R. Hafen,
"A Brief History of the Fur Trade of the Far
West," in Mountain Men, 1:166-7; Wishart, Fur

simile (Fairfield, Wash.: Ye Galleon Press, 1972),
6, 13, 24.

81. For biographies and analysis of each
signer, see Cornelius J. Brosnan, "The Oregon
Memorial of 1838 and its Signers," in New Spain
and the Anglo-American West, Historical Contri

butions Presented to Herbert Eugene Bolton,
(Lancaster, Penn.: George P. Hammond, 1932),
2:50-1.

Trade of the American West, 159-60; R.G.

82. Philip Leget Edwards, Sketch of the Or

Robertson, Competitive Struggle: America's West
ern Fur Trading Posts, 1764-1865 (Boise, Idaho:

egon Territory or Emigrants' Guide (1842; re

Tamarak Books, 1999), 74-6.
76. Wyeth, "Copy of a Letter and a State

ment of Facts pertaining to a Claim based upon

Operations involved in the Two Expeditions,
December 13, 1847, in Young, ed., Correspon
dence and Journals, 255; Mr. Wyeth's Memoir,

print, Fairfield, Wash.: Ye Galleon Press, 1992),
11, 12.

83. James Douglas and John Work used
this phrase in their "Letter to Govr., Deputy
Govr. And Committee, Honble. Hudsons Bay
Corny, Fort Victoria, December 7,1846," in Fort
Victoria Letters, 1846-1851, ed. Harwell Bowsfield

U.S. House. 25th Cong., 3d sess. H.Doc. 101

(Winnipeg: Hudson's Bay Record Society, 1979),

(1839), app. 1.

1; LeRoy R. Hafen and Ann W. Hafen, eds.,

77. H.H. Bancroft, History of Oregon, 1834
1848, in The Works of Hubert Howe Bancroft
(San Francisco: The History Company, 1886),

Rufus B. Sage, His Letters and Papers, 1836-1847

29:70.

his travels in the Far West, one published in

78. Bradford Cole, "Nathaniel Wyeth's Co
lumbia River Fishing and Trading Company,"

Philadelphia in 1855 and the other in Boston in

280.

(Glendale, Calif.: Arthur H. Clark Co., 1956),

2:171. Sage wrote two popular accounts based on

1857.
84. John Dunn, The Oregon Territory and

5i6 OHQ vol. 104, no. 4

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

the British North American Fur Trade (Philadel

phia: G.B. Zieber & Co., 1845), 207.
85. Ibid., 232; HJ. Warre, Overland to Or
egon in 1845: Impressions of a Journey across

cific Northwest (Portland: Champoeg Press,
1956), 207; "Origin of Hudson's Bay Company
Employees in the Oregon Country, January to

June, 1846," Oregon Search File, HBCA,

North America (Ottawa: Public Archives of Winnipeg. Based on B239/1/16, B239/g/85.
Canada, 1976), 84.
94. Hussey, Champoeg, chap. 8, i73ff;
86. Warre, "Report," in Herman A. Leader, Oswald West, "Oregon's First White Settlers on
"McLoughlin's Answer to the Warre Report," French Prairie," Oregon Historical Quarterly 43:3
Oregon Historical Quarterly 33:3 (1932): 216-17.
(i942):i98-209. See also Mackie, Trading Be
87. "McLoughlin's Answer to the Warre yond the Mountains, 3i4ff.
Report," 227; McLoughlin to Sir J.H. Pelly,
95. The HBC exercised its rights under the
Governor, HBC, July 12, 1846, quoted in Oregon Treaty and built Fort Connah on the
Morrison, Outpost, 427. See her reconstruction Flathead River in Montana in 1846. The post
of this transition in his life at 413-27.
served as a general store to Indians and whites
88. This is elaborately outlined in Frederick living in the Mission Valley until 1871. See
V. Holman, "A Brief History of the Oregon Pro Albert J. Partoll, "Fort Connah, A Frontier
visional Government and What Caused its For Trading Post, 1847-1871," Pacific Northwest

Quarterly 30 (1939): 399-415. In 1852, through
paid lobbyists, the HBC approached the U.S.
89. John McLoughlin, quoted in John government, offering to give up its remaining
Hussey, Champoeg: Place of Transition: A Dis posts operating within the U.S. in exchange
puted History (Portland: Oregon Historical So for $1,000,000. The State Department made a
ciety Press, 1967), 179. See Hussey's discussion counteroffer of $300,000 in 1855, but the Sen
at i67ff.; Merk, The Oregon Question; Norman ate defeated the appropriation. Most of the
A. Graebner, Empire on the Pacific: A Study in posts were abandoned or closed during the
Indian wars of 1855-1857, and all suffered tres
American Continental Expansion (New York:
Ronald Press, 1955); David Pletcher, The Diplo pass or land fraud or both from the British
macy of Annexation: Texas, Oregon, and the point of view. In 1863, a commission was cre
Mexican War (Columbia: University of Mis
ated to resolve the issue. By then, only Fort
souri Press, 1973); Carey, "British Side of the Okanagan and Fort Colville in Washington and
Fort Connah in Montana were active. In 1869,
Oregon Question."
90. This was Merk's original conclusion in the commission awarded the HBC $450,000 for
mation," Quarterly of the Oregon Historical Soci
ety 13:2 (1912): 89-159.

The Oregon Question, recently validated by its rights and $200,000 for those of the Puget's
Thomas C McClintock in "British Newspapers Sound Agricultural Company, paid in gold coin
and the Oregon Treaty of 1846," Oregon Histori

in 1871. See "Settlement of Claims of the

cal Quarterly 104:1 (2003): 96-109.
Hudson's Bay and Puget's Sound Agricultural
91. Deutsch, "The Evolution of Territorial Companies," 13 Stat. 651; Treaty Series 128, in
and State Boundaries," 121; Oregon Treaty, as Treaties, ed. Blevans, 12:154-6. Also see Rich,
Proclaimed by the President of the United States, History of the Hudson's Bay Company, 3:743-8.
August 5, 1846. 9 Stat. 869; Treaty Series 120, in Concurrently, in 1867, Parliament passed the
Treaties, ed. Blevans, 12:95-6. For Congres British North American Act, creating the Do
sional, Department of State, and Executive Of minion of Canada and guaranteeing transfer
fice attitudes regarding the HBC during debate of Rupert's Land to Canada. In 1869, after two
on the Oregon Treaty, see U.S. Senate. 29th years of rough discourse, the HBC surrendered
Cong., ist sess., S.Doc. 489 (Serial 478).
to the British Crown its monopoly charter to
92. T.C. Elliott, "British Values in Oregon,
trade within Rupert's Land for ?300,000, re
1847," Oregon Historical Quarterly 32 :i (1931):
taining its posts and one-twentieth of the "fer

45.

tile belt" of the Prairies. See Galbraith, Hudson's

93. Carl Landerholm, trans., Notices and
Voyages of the Famed Quebec Mission to the Pa

Bay Company, 410-28; Rich, History, 3:850

90.

Swagerty, "The Leviathan of the North" 517

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:19:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


