---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
The Hudson's Bay Company and Its Critics in the Eighteenth Century
Author(s): Glyndwr Williams
Source: Transactions of the Royal Historical Society , 1970, Vol. 20 (1970), pp. 149-171
Published by: Cambridge University Press on behalf of the Royal Historical Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3678766
READ 14 NOVEMBER 1969

AS the Hudson's Bay Company prepare

tercentenary it is not mere academic pe
prompts a paper on a period in the Com
when it was threatened with extinction. Lon

fascination, and crucial in the story of the Com

one of the great business enterprises of the m
survival amid the bitter criticism directed at
in the eighteenth century. Small and appare
showed unexpected stubbornness in resisting
whelmed several of its fellows. The controver

the Hudson's Bay Company also help to illum

tile pressure groups working against mon

eighteenth century, and reveal something of
which accompanied the steady expansion of
overseas.

The Hudson's Bay Company was born in a flur
granting in Charles II's reign. The East India Com
Muscovy Company gained new charters, two su
companies were incorporated, and in May 1670 th
Company of Adventurers of England tradeing in
received a royal charter after the pioneer tradin
Nonsuch to Hudson Bay in 1668-9. The first Gov

Rupert (the second, James, duke of York), an
original 'Adventurers' included such notable

Arlington, the duke of Albemarle and Anthony
The charter granted the new Company exclusive
and government over

all those Seas Streightes Bayes Rivers Lake

Soundes in whatsoever Latitude they shall bee t

the entrance of the Streightes commonly c
149

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

IO TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

Streightes together with all the Landes and Territoryes

the Countryes Coastes and Soundes afordsaid...l

-an immense area which later knowledge was to reveal ex
as far as the Rocky Mountains.
A parchment grant was one thing, its exploitation quit
other. Almost from the beginning the Company had to co
with the competition of rival fur-traders from New Franc
disrupting effects of raids and occupations during the fr
Anglo-French hostilities of the late seventeenth centruy, i
loping expeditions from both Old and New England, and fin
difficulties at home.2 As the hopes of easy profits recede
courtiers and ministers of the early days were replaced by

men, and it may have been the Company's resultant la

political weight which explains the partial failure of its attemp

1690 to obtain Parliamentary confirmation of the charter.
mentary approval was given for seven years only, and from
onwards the Company's legal existence was perilously depen
on the shaky foundations of royal prerogative.

The extent to which the Company was embroiled in

diplomacy and politics at this time obscures the fact that its t

remained a small-scale affair: a couple of ships a year to th
three or four posts garrisoned by less than a hundred men
and returns which allowed dividend payments only at err
intervals. The most useful printed source for the early hist
the Company, John Oldmixon's British Empire in Americ
the Company firmly in its place. The history of Hudson
Oldmixon conceded, should have come first in his book si
was the most northerly of British territories in America, but

being no Towns nor Plantations in this Country, but two or

poor Forts to defend the Factories, we thought we w

Liberty to place it where we pleas'd, and were loath to let
History open with the Description of so miserable a Wilder

1E. E. Rich (ed.), Minutes of the Hudson's Bay Company z6yz(Toronto, Champlain Society, and London, Hudson's Bay Record S
1942), P. 139. Acknowledgement is made to the Hudson's Bay Re

Society for permission to quote from its volumes.

2 On all this see E. E. Rich, The History of the Hudson's Bay Co
zGyo-z8yo (London, Hudson's Bay Record Society, 1958), Vol. I.

3 John Oldmixon, The British Empire in America (London, I708), i

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS I151

At the time when Oldmixon was writing, during the War of the
Spanish Succession, French incursions had in fact restricted th
Company to a single post in the Bay; and although government

support of the Company led to a restoration of posts and territories

by the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, this was not achieved without
an exasperated comment from Bolingbroke about the obstinacy o
'these smug ancient gentlemen' of the Hudson's Bay Company.'

Bolingbroke's jibe was misplaced in one respect. The new
Governor of the Company, who was to remain the dominan
figure in its affairs for thirty years after the Utrecht settlement,

was a young Bencher of the Middle Temple, Sir Bibye Lake

Only twenty-seven years old when he succeeded his father as
Deputy Governor in 1711, Lake became Governor the next year
and held that position until his death in 1743. Also Sub-Governo
of the Royal African Company, Lake was the first Governor o
the Hudson's Bay Company to devote most of his attention to th

problems of overseas trade, and under him the Company's

fortunes revived. In the Bay the coastal posts shared a modest
expansion of trade, while in London the Committee followed a
policy of sound, conservative finance which allowed the paymen

of regular dividends from 1718 onwards. But if Lake's long

governorship ushered in a period of quiet prosperity it also saw
the beginnings of resentment and opposition which after his death

threatened to overturn the Company. One of the Company'

main defences against potential rivals was secrecy, an obsessive

guarding of the knowledge and expertise accumulated by it

servants over the years of living, trading and navigating in th
sub-Arctic conditions of the Bay region. Details of the timing an

route of the dangerous voyage through Hudson Strait, th
position of harbours in the Bay, methods of trade with th

Indians, were carefully hidden from outsiders. Instructions from
the London Committee to the Bay factors laid down that 'none
of our servants do send any intelligence to, or carry on any cor

respondence with any person whatsoever in London or else

where relating to the affairs of the Company.'2 Ships' captains
were ordered to deliver journals kept on board to the Company

1 Quoted in Beckles Willson, The Great Company (London, 19o8), i. 256
2 HBC A.6/5, fo. 56. I am grateful to the Governor and Committee of th
Hudson's Bay Company for permission to quote from the Company record

at Beaver House, London.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

152 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

immediately on arrival, and to ensure that all letters brought h

on the ships were sent to the Committee for scrutiny.' Membe

the Committee itself were warned not to let copies of the c
out of their possession.2 What little exploration was carri

by Company servants rarely became public knowledg

printed maps of the Bay remained as crudely inaccurate a
had been a century before. At home the Company's shares
came on to the open market, and the names of stockholder
even of the Committee were not available., In a guide to th

printed in this period Bibye Lake was listed, but only

capacity as director of the Royal African Company.4 Whe

second edition of Oldmixon's British Empire in Americ
published in 1741, the sole additional information on the
pany since the first edition was the rather stale news that its

tories had been restored by the Treaty of Utrecht. On de
ments since 1713 the author could say nothing, since the a

tions to the Company for information had gone unans

despite his 'pressing instance'.5
Up to a point the policy of close secrecy was effective.
quarter of a century the Company slipped from public sigh
escaped the criticism levelled at the other overseas trading

panies. Cato's Letters, widely read in periodicals and co

editions during the aftermath of the South Sea Bubble, cast
those companies as unions of

great Numbers of artful and wealthy Merchants into

spiracies and Combinations against general Trade, and by
means giving or selling the Industry and Acquirements
whole Nation to satiate and glut a few overgrown Plund
... They are the Bane of all fair Commerce, the Discoura

ment of our Manufacturers, the Ruin of private and industr

1 HBC A.6/6, fos. 83, I10.
2 HBC A.I/33, fo. 77d.
3 Hudson's Bay had been an active stock only during the 169O's, an
last public quotation was in I7o0. The Company's records show tha

transfers in the eighteenth century were arranged privately, and tha
of the transfers were from one member of a family to another, or b
existing shareholders. See e.g. HBC A.43/4 (Stock Transfer Book, 1
4 A Compleat Guide to London (London, 1740), p. 134.

5 John Oldmixon, The British Empire in America (2nd edn., Lo
1741), i. 566-7.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 153

Traders, and must end in the Ruin of themselves, and all Tr

whatever. 1

Twenty years later Matthew Decker, in his Essay on the Causes oJ
the Decline of the Foreign Trade, was pursuing the same theme:

'Monopolies are absurd, inconsistent, and destructive.. . never
yet was a Monopolized Trade extended to the degree of a Free
one; therefore any Country abounding in Monopolies must
decline in Trade.'2 But the Hudson's Bay Company was not mentioned in either work. At a time when the East India Company,
Royal African Company, Levant Company and South Sea Company faced criticism in and out of Parliament,3 the Hudson's Bay
Company carried on its trade with a minimum of fuss and bother.
The chink in the Company's protective armour proved to be
that chimera of Arctic exploration, the Northwest Passage. Lake
and his prosaic fellow directors were totally unable to convince

Arthur Dobbs, Surveyor-General of Ireland and for long an
Irish M.P. noted for his fiery dedication to the expansion of

British trade, that it had made a serious search for that mythical
strait.4 Frustrated by the Company, Dobbs turned to his political
and mercantile contacts in London, and by 1740 had persuaded
the Walpole administration to send a naval expedition to Hudson
Bay in quest of a passage. Under the command of Christopher

Middleton, a captain formerly in the Company's employ, the
expedition sailed in 1741, but not before the Company had fought
a running skirmish with the Admiralty over the potential threat
to its trade. Lake's reluctance to promise aid to Middleton's ships
if they got into difficulties provoked an indignant response from
the First Lord of the Admiralty, Sir Charles Wager. In letters to
the duke of Newcastle and the Regency Council Wager described
1 Cato's Letters (London, 1724), iii. 172, 176.
2 Matthew Decker, An Essay on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign

Trade (London, 1744), p. 233 See, for example, the summary in Lucy S. Sutherland, The East India
Company in Eighteenth-century Politics (Oxford, 1952), pp. 28-30, of the
attack on the East India Company in 1730 by M.P.'s supported by a group
of London, Liverpool and Bristol merchants.
4 On Dobbs, the Hudson's Bay Company and the Northwest Passage see
Desmond Clarke, Arthur Dobbs Esquire z689-z y65 Surveyor-General of
Ireland Prospector and Governor of North Carolina (London, 1958), chs. 5-8;
Glyndwr Williams, The British Search for the Northwest Passage in the
Eighteenth Century (London, 1962), chs. II-V.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

154 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

the Company's stand as 'very unbecoming a Company who subsist by His Majesty's favour, having only an old charter which no
doubt they have made several breaches in',' while to Lake went
an irate letter informing him that his conditions for giving aid to

Middleton 'are harder than is the practice of any civilized nation
towards the subjects of another in amity with it, and is therefore
the less excusable with regard to fellow subjects, and employed
by the Government on a work of public benefit.'2
The failure of the expedition to find a passage brought little
comfort to the Company. By calling for an official inquiry into
Middleton's handling of the expedition Dobbs kept the Northwest Passage in the forefront of public attention, but from now on
it was part of a wider scheme to abolish the Company's mono-

poly. In Middleton's words, it became 'a cloak to cover other

designs'.3 Even before Middleton sailed, Dobbs had secured from
the Attorney-General an informal opinion that the Company's
charter was of doubtful legal validity, and in a letter to an Irish
friend had admitted that he intended 'to see if we can't open the
trade' of Hudson Bay.4 To this end he plunged into a lengthy
pamphlet war, in the course of which he produced a substantial
and important book. His Account of Hudson's Bay, published in
1744, was not only the first book devoted to the Company and
its territories, it was a powerful piece of special pleading. Dobbs'
earlier friendship with Middleton had given him access to confidential Company documents which he now used to good effect.
The complexities of the Company's standard of trade with the
Indians were summarized by Dobbs in terms which ignored all
overheads and gave the Company 20000% profit; the charter was
printed, and the extent of its grant sharply contrasted with the
Company's limited trading operations in the Bay; the thrusting
movements of French traders south and west of the Company's
sphere were described in menacing terms. Dobbs' insistence that
the Company, content to make high profits on a small trade, was
1 S.P. Dom. (Naval) 42/81, p. 388.
2 Adm. 2/473, P. 473.

3 Christopher Middleton, A Rejoinder to Mr. Dobbs's Reply (London,
1745), P. 119.
4 Castle Ward Papers, Bk. V, p. 131. I am grateful to Mr Desmond Clarke,
Librarian of the Royal Dublin Society, who lent me copies of the letters of
Arthur Dobbs at a time when they were preserved among the Castle Ward
Papers in the possession of Viscount Bangor.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 155

allowing the French to hem it in along the coastal fring
an effective argument as the struggle between Britain an
for overseas dominance increased in intensity. One of
damaging criticisms made at this time of the Levant C
which escaped Parliamentary modification of its charter
by a mere three votes in the Lords, was that

monopolizers will always make great profits both up
they buy and what they sell; that is the true cause of t
of our Turkey trade ... If there had been no monopoly
Turkey trade the French would never have thought of
less succeeded in becoming our rivals.'

In similar vein Dobbs argued that if the trade of Hudson
laid open, exports there would increase tenfold, and sett

would follow trade as far as the Mississippi and bey

which Means, the Inland Trade of that vast Northern Co
much greater than Europe, would in time be wholly en
Britain, independent of any other European power.'2
The first move in the campaign against the Company
oblique one. After Dobbs had sounded various ministers
ing Henry Pelham, First Lord of the Treasury, a group o

merchants presented a petition to Parliament early

requesting a government reward for the discovery of a N

Passage. This discovery, they claimed, would open

Countries, in order to increase the Exports of our Manuf
and improve the Commerce and Navigation of Great Br

The Commons was not likely to resist such impecca

cantilist sentiments, and by May 1745 an Act of Parlia
on the statute book offering an award of ?20,000 to the
of a navigable passage. A subscription list was already o
?7,2o0 was raised to equip an expedition which sailed in

Hudson Bay. To outward appearance the whole affair
nocuous enough, but the Hudson's Bay Company sa

sinister implications. The 'Articles of Agreement' which
for the division of the reward also envisaged the forma
new trading company to exploit the discovery, and pro

1 See A. C. Wood, A History of the Levant Company (London
p. 154-

2 Arthur Dobbs, An Account ofthe Countries adjoining to Hudson's Bay ...

(London, 1744), p. 65.

3 Journals of the House of Commons, xxiv. 720.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

156 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

among the peers, bishops and Irishmen with enough faith

Dobbs to invest ?ioo apiece in the venture was a group of abou
thirty London merchants., Many of these were already engage
in oceanic trade; seven of them joined with Dobbs to form the
North West Committee which organized the expedition; and as
the nucleus of a trading corporation they posed a real threat t
the Company.
Within a few months of the return of the expedition in th
autumn of 1747 the Company's suspicions were confirmed. No
passage had been discovered, but in February 1748 the Nort
West Committee, supported by merchants from London, Bristo

Liverpool and Glasgow, petitioned the Crown for a tradin

charter.2 As Samuel Smith, Dobbs' London agent and secretary
of the North West Committee, explained in letters to the origin
subscribers, they hoped for a perpetual grant of all territories
Hudson Bay not actually occupied by the Company, and for an
exclusive right to trade in them. The Company, he asserted, ha
forfeited its charter both on legal grounds, and because of its
failure to exploit the grant of I670. Published comment at the
time tended to support Dobbs, and was invariably hostile toward
the Hudson's Bay Company. Even the fiasco of the recent exped
tion was turned against the Company. The earliest first-hand
report of its misadventures to appear in the press hit out at th
Company, whose profits, the writer claimed, 'are what no body
but the persons concerned can conceive'.4 In his semi-offic

account of the expedition published in 1748 Henry Ellis too

every opportunity to blacken the Company, while the expedition's inability to discover Dobbs' promised passage was glossed
over. The last section of Ellis's Voyage to Hudson's-Bay was cha
acteristically entitled, '. . . the great Probability of a Passage .
notwithstanding the same was not actually discovered in the La
Expedition.' Other writers, economists and merchants could on

1 The names of the subscribers are listed in Henry Ellis, A Voyage t
Hudson's-Bay by the Dobbs Gallery and California, In the Years z.746 a
z.74.7, For Discovering a Northwest Passage (London, 1748), pp. xxiii-xx
2 See Acts of the Privy Council of England (Colonial Series) iii. 776Throughout this paper dates before 1752 are given in Old Style, except th
the year is taken to begin on I January, not 25 March.
3 The letter of 8 February 1748 is printed in Clarke, Arthur Dobbs
pp. 212-13.

4 The British MagaZine (London, 1747), ii. 502.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 157

take their facts where they found them, and it was Dobbs a

supporters who monopolized the printed word. The eff

anti-Company publicity is seen in the revised edition by J
Campbell of Harris's stately Collection of Voyages and Tra
Campbell was not inclined to censure the chartered compa
wholesale, and indeed defended the East India Company be
of the importance of its trade-'the great Wheel that mov
the rest'. But the Hudson's Bay Company he condemned f

secrecy, for its failure to find the Northwest Passage, for enco

ing the belief that Hudson Bay was 'the most forlorn and d
Part of the Universe', and most of all for its failure to expa

fur trade. He concluded with words which echo Dobbs:

employ but a few ships, and a small Number of Seamen; t
Factories are few and thin, all which may answer their Pu
very well; but 'tis plain they do not answer the national Pu
of enlarging our Navigation, and increasing our Seamen.'"

The Privy Council appointed the Attorney-General

Solicitor-General to report on the petition, and both side
sented evidence and affidavits.2 Dobbs and his associates del

a 16-point statement in which they attacked the Company
well-rehearsed lines, and pledged themselves to an expans
policy if granted a charter. The Company, they conceded,
be allowed to keep their existing posts, 'with a reasonable d
round each'. The Company's answer before the Law Office
most forthright in its retort to the North West Commit
request for a charter:

Complain of the Company's having a charter, yet apply f
to take away the Company's lands and property ... comp
of the Company's privileges, and require the same . . . c
plain the Company refuse strangers to take away their t
yet demand an exclusive trade themselves.

The final point made by the Company in its defence was a
general one:

What exclamations would be made by the American
prietors, what clamours by the boroughs and cities,

1 John Harris, Navigantium atque Itinerantium Bibliotheca: or, a c
Collection of Voyages and Travels, revised and enlarged by John Ca

(London, 1744-8), i. 925; ii. 288, 440o.
2 The pleas of Dobbs and the Company are set out in HBC, E.I8

112-19.

TRANS. 5TH S.-VOL 20-L

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

158 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

outcries by colleges and ecclesiastical corporations if thei

properties were invaded, taken away or laid open and common

The appeal to vested property rights was a strong one in Hano
verian England,' and may have influenced the Law Officers in
their report of August 1748. This suggested that the validity

the charter could best be tested in a court of law, found that many

of the petitioners' charges were without substance, and oppose
a situation in which two companies would hold charters to trad
in the same region.2

This rebuff was the more unexpected to Dobbs since he

imagined that he had gained the support of powerful ministers
and in a private letter had written, 'Most people think the Com

pany will be glad to drop their own Charter and come in a
sharers in the new Charter upon our terms.'3 After consulting the

duke of Argyle, Walpole's old adviser in Scotland, Dobbs decide
to lay the whole matter before Parliament, and though he himse
withdrew from the fray his merchant colleagues pressed hom
the attack. In March 1749 a Committee of the House of Commo
was appointed to investigate conditions and trade in Hudson Bay
and outside Parliament agitation against the Company develope
in a manner which bore all the marks of a well-organized cam
paign. Before the end of April twenty-five petitions reached th

Commons from the manufacturing towns and ports (and a further
three after the Committee had reported) praying that the trade
Hudson Bay should be opened.4 The demand for a monopoly w
dropped, so the campaign of 1749 was to be fought over differen
ground from that of the previous year. Although the wording
the petitions was not identical, their general similarity points t
a common origin, and the lead in the campaign appears to hav
been taken by the Liverpool merchants, traditionally more inclined than London towards an open trade. On 22 March thirty

nine of them signed a request to one of the Liverpool M.P

1 It was one made by the East India Company later in the century, at th

time of Fox's India Bill of 1783 for example. See Sutherland, East India
Company, pp. 401, 412.
2 Report of D. Ryder and W. Murray to the Privy Council, io Augu

1748. Printed in Papers presented to the Committee Appointed to Inquire int

the State and Conditions of the Countries Adjoining to Hudson's Bay, and
the Trade carried on there (London 1749), p. 78.
3 Castle Ward Papers, Bk. VI, p. 142.
4 See Journals of the House of Commons, xxv, 810-5 2 passim.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 159

pressing for his firm support of the campaign,' and a few day
later another letter was sent to the Society of Merchant Venturers

of Bristol asking for its co-operation.2 The arrival of two doz
petitions at the Commons within a three-week period in April

indicates that the letter to Bristol was one of many, and th

probability that the campaign was organized from Liverpool is
strengthened by the prominent role played by the Liverpo
merchant John Hardman, 'The great Hardman', to quote from
his obituary, 'noted for his contriving, and being industrious, a
procuring and presenting memorials and petitions.'3 Certainly h
was active in circulating the petitions on the African trade at

this time, and in the agitation of 1748-50o against the Roy

African Company the lead was taken by the well-tried alliance o
Liverpool and Bristol. The day after the Hudson Bay committe

was appointed by Parliament petitions from Liverpool an

Bristol on the African trade were presented to the Commons, ea
bearing a clause critical of joint-stock companies, 'whose interes
hath been, and ever will be, found incompatible with that of
free and open trade.'4 Mostly the same towns participated in th
two campaigns: fifteen of the eighteen petitions which reache

the Commons in 1750 on the African trade were from plac

which had petitioned the year before in favour of an open trad

to Hudson Bay. Not all had connections with trade, actual

potential, to the Bay. Ripon, for example, presented petitions o

both the African and the Hudson Bay trade to the Common
though its chief manufacture, spurs, was not the most obviou
export to either region. At the individual level there were also
links between the African and Hudson Bay campaigns. William

Bowden and Henry Douglas from London, Richard Gildart, John
Hardman, Nathaniel Basnet and Thomas Truman from Liverpool
William Wansey and Samuel Smith from Bristol, were involved
in both; and all but two of them had been subscribers to the 174
expedition to Hudson Bay. At least thirty-one of the thirty-nin
Liverpool merchants who signed the letter of March 1749 to the

1 See Brit. Mus., Lansdowne MS. 846, fo. 277.
2See W. E. Minchinton (ed.), Politics and the Port of Bristol in the

Eighteenth Century (Bristol Record Society, 1963), p. 69.
3 Quoted in Elizabeth Donnan (ed.), Documents illustrative of the Histor

of the Slave Trade to America (Washington, 1931) ii. 499.
4 Journals of the House of Commons, xxv, 777.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

160 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

M.P. on the Hudson Bay trade were active in the slave trade.'
There can be no doubt that these years saw a series of co-ordinated

attacks on the chartered companies led by the Liverpool and
Bristol merchants, with substantial support from London and the
other trading towns.
As the petitions arrived, the Parliamentary Committee was
busy questioning witnesses, twenty-two in all. Of these fifteen
were former servants of the Company, six were merchants, and

the other was Dobbs. All except one of the merchants were
associated in the move to open the Bay trade, and their evidence
was predictably optimistic about the prospects of expansion and
profits. From their remarks before the Committee some were
thinking in terms of the more familiar African trade, with individual ventures and no permanent posts; but for the most part
their arguments came straight from Dobbs. Of the ex-servants of

the Company summoned before the Committee many were
partisan. The first called, Joseph Robson, had been dismissed by
the Company two years earlier; others had deserted the Company's service to sail with the Northwest Passage expeditions of

1741 and 1746; yet others had left the Company many years
earlier and had little useful to tell the Committee. The questions
asked varied from witness to witness, but the main pattern of the
Committee's interrogation is clear.2 The M.P.s were interested in
physical details of the Bay, with particular emphasis on the presence of minerals and the suitability of the area for settlement; in

the Company's trading methods, and its apparent reluctance to
expand inland; in the possibility of a Northwest Passage; and in
the Company's treatment of the Indians and of its own servants.

The issues were all ones which had been raised by Dobbs, and
the general tenor of the questioning combined with the mixture

of ignorance and prejudice shown by several of the witnesses
produced a distinctly unfavourable impression of the Company.
This was heightened by the failure of the Company to produce
any witnesses before the investigating Committee. Papers re1 See list of Company of Merchants trading to Africa, and list of shipowners engaged in the African trade, in Donnan, Documents illustrative of
the Slave Trade, ii. 492-3, 496-8.
2 See Report from the Committee Appointed to Inquire into the State and
Conditions of the Countries Adjoining to Hudson's Bay, and of the Trade carried

on there (London, 1749).

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS I6I
cently discovered which belonged to the Company's secretary at
this time, Charles Hay, show that this was a deliberate decision.'
The Company reserved the right to be heard before the House at
a later stage, but for the time being bypassed the Committee, and
instead sent to each M.P. a pamphlet written by the Company's

solicitor, The Case of the Hudson's Bay Company. This first
reasoned reply by the Company to its critics was a terse, effective

statement which made the most of the Company's none too
impressive record of exploration, its reliance on permanent posts
along the shores of the Bay in preference to the French method of

sending traders among the Indians, and its refusal to contemplate
colonization in so harsh a climate. The argument over the Company's affairs was being conducted at two different levels. Dobbs
and his associates were proposing vast, expansive schemes, filling
in the blank spaces on their small-scale maps of North America
with an easy confidence, and predicting a tenfold increase in the
fur trade 'in a very short Time'.2 The Company was thinking in
practical terms, of the possible rather than the ideal, and with
emphasis on the difficulties rather than the opportunities of the
Bay trade. By limiting its defence at this stage to a written statement, the Company avoided any possible breach of commercial
security by its own servants before inquisitive M.P.s, but it could

not resist the Committee's demand to inspect certain of its
records. These concerned the Company's standard of trade with
the Indians, its settlements, the value of its exports and imports,
the names of stockholders, and the instructions sent to the Bay
factors; and were printed as an appendix to the report of the
Committee. For the first time in its history the structure of the
Company and its trade were laid bare. The figures showed that
the gigantic profits attributed to the Company by Dobbs were a
myth. Over the previous ten years profits had averaged around
30% on an annual outlay of about ?27,000, and only once in the
previous thirty years had a dividend of more than Io% been paid.
If the Company presented an attractive target to outside merchants it was because of the potential rather than actual trade of
Hudson Bay and its hinterland.
The report of the Committee was received by the Commons
1 See Hudson's Bay Company Papers, University of Toronto Library, p. I.
2 [Arthur Dobbs], A Short State of the Countries and Trade of North
America. Claimed by the Hudson's Bay Company (London, 1749), p. 6.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

I62 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

on 24 April 1749. Hay's notes show that the Compan

advocate in the House was Sir John Barnard, M.P. for th
London, and a respected authority on financial affairs w
years earlier had been thought a possible replacement fo
Pelham as Chancellor of the Exchequer.' Once a leading o

of the East India Company,2 Barnard now insisted t

Enquiry instead of doing any good was in his opinion a p

ing that did a great deal of harm', and that the petitions fro

trading towns 'had been rather solicited by the promoter
Enquiry than arising from the corporations whose names

them.' His speech is a reminder that the Company's

dividends, its investment of surplus capital in a well-ba
selection of shares, and its care not to glut the fur-ma
given it a reputation of solid respectability in the City.3
there any rebel group of shareholders to weaken the Co

from within. Five times during the decade extraordinary me

of the General Court had been summoned to consider the
tions of Dobbs' activities, and each time shareholders ha
content to leave matters in the hands of the Governor a

mittee.4 As a Committee member replied to Dobbs' alleg

about the 'perpetual Directors, or rather Dictators' an

misdeeds, 'The Proprietors are fully satisfied with the D
conduct, and Mr Dobbs cannot produce any single Adve
that makes any complaint.'5
At the beginning of May the Commons sat as a Comm
the Whole House to consider the report, and it called fu
witnesses. These included the most experienced of the Co
factors and ship-captains in England at the time, and rep
tives of the Liverpool and Bristol merchants. No printed
exist of the proceedings, but a set of manuscript jotting
Company's archives show that the attention of the Hou
moved away from the points of detail which had occupie

1 Hudson's Bay Company Papers, University of Toronto Libr
Manuscripts of the Earl of Egmont, Diary of the First Earl of
(Viscount Percival), Vol. III, i739-i747 (London, Historical Man
Commission, I923), p. 314.
2 Ibid., i. 65-71.
3 See Rich, History of Hudson's Bay Company, i. 649-534 See HBC A.z/I, fo. 35d, A.2/2, fos. 5, 8, io.
5 Annotation by John or Robert Merry in Dobbs, Short State,
1 HBC E.i8/i, fos. 190-204.
This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 163
of the time of the investigating Committee in April, and now
centred on the fundamental issues of national policy raised by the
controversy. Was the Company proving an effective rival to the
French in North America, and should it make more attempt to
open up the interior? Here the Company was vulnerable, but its

opponents had weakened their case by loud exaggeration. In
reply to repeated questions the Company's servants doggedly
insisted that cost, difficulties of terrain, and transportation prob-

lems, ruled out any large-scale movement inland. The future was
to show that expansion into the interior was not quite the fearsome prospect imagined by the old hands at the Bayside posts,
but in 1749 it was they and not the Company's critics who spoke
with the voice of experience, and their evidence was probably

decisive. A motion that an address should be presented to the
King 'to take a proper method to try the right claimed by the
Governor and Company of Adventurers of England trading into

Hudson Bay to exercise an exclusive trade' was defeated by a
majority of more than two to one.' A newspaper report no doubt
reflected the feelings of most M.P.s when it commented that 'as
it appeared to be impossible to preserve this trade without forts
and settlements on the coast of Hudson's Bay, and as such forts
and settlements must be supported either by exclusive companies,

or at the publick expence, the affair was dropt...'
The verdict was not immediately accepted, rumours of interloping expeditions continued to alert the London Committee, and
1752 saw further attempts to harass the Company. The outlines
of this new campaign are hazy, and certainly it did not carry the
weight of the 1749 attack. Dobbs once more seems to have been
the guiding hand, and his papers contain several schemes of 175 I
and 1752 which if adopted would have damaged or destroyed the
Company.3 The Irish government might buy out the Hudson's
Bay Company, ran one proposal, and settle the hinterland with
industrious Irishmen. Or, the Bay area might be turned into a
huge penal settlement, administered by a simple rule-of-thumb:
the worse the criminal the farther north he should be sent, with
the 'most enormous and confirmed offenders' handed over to the
1 Ibid., fo. 203d.

2The London Magarine (London, 1749), xviii. 41 I.
3 Castle Dobbs Papers (Public Record Office of Northern Ireland, Belfast),

D.O.D. i62/53, 54, 6o, 61.
This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

164 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY
Eskimos as slaves.? Apart from these fantasies there seems to have
been some kind of attempt to link two separate interests in the
new campaign: the hatters, forever grumbling about the price of
beaver-skins, and a group of Dobbs' merchant associates anxious

to gain a foothold in Labrador. The inevitable Hardman was
Dobbs' contact with the hatters, but though a Parliamentary
Committee heard evidence from them strongly critical of the
Company, their petition of January 1752 to the Commons met

with no positive response.2 The petition of the London merchants to the Crown for an exclusive grant of land and trade in
Labrador also foundered. Dobbs' papers contain ample evidence
to confirm the Company's fear that behind this move was an
attempt to encroach on its established trade farther west, and the
Board of Trade gave the petition short shrift. It clearly thought
that the fewer monopolistic companies there were the better, and
commented, 'As to an exclusive grant the experience of the many
inconveniencies attending such grants more particularly in the
case of the Hudson's Bay Company makes it a matter at least of
great doubt and difficulty.'3

The reasons for the reprieves of 1749 and 1752 may not have
been flattering to the Hudson's Bay Company, but it fared better

than other trading companies under attack at this time. The
Royal African Company was dissolved in 175o, and three years

later the charter of the Levant Company was modified. As a
narrow joint-stock corporation the Hudson's Bay Company was

to outward appearance more vulnerable than these two companies with their looser organization and more open membership,
but it had an inherent strength which the others lacked. Under
the Levant Company British trade to Turkey had dwindled since

about 1730. The Royal African Company had long been a

financial burden on the government, and in the late 1740's was in

a state of collapse. The Hudson's Bay Company, on the other
hand, drove a steady if limited trade. It asked the government for
no subsidies, no special favours. Ministers may have been concerned as evidence mounted pointing to the Company's lack of
1 D.O.D. 162/60, p. 5.

2 See Reports from Committees of the House of Commons (1803), ii. 373-7.

3 Journal of the Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, zy50-zy53
(London, 1932), p. 300. See also C.O. 5/6, fos. 71-91; S.P. Dom. 44/323,
fos. 41-9.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS I65
energy in exploiting its vast grant, but they had no guarantee that

either of the alternatives proposed by the Company's critics-the
establishment of a rival company, or the opening of the trade to

individual merchants-would have produced a firmer bulwark
against the French.
As the reverberations of the attacks of Dobbs and his associates
died away, the Company faced a future in which it could no longer

rely on obscurity for protection. The new facts of life were soon
brought home to it. In the second edition of his Brief Essay on

... Trade, Josiah Tucker angrily criticized the Company's
'escape' at the hands of the Parliamentary Committee, and

accused it together with the East India Company and the Levant
Company of monopolizing the trade of three-quarters of the
globe 'to enrich a few rapacious Directors'.' In works privately

printed and circulated Tucker was even more scathing, and
urged the government to buy out the Company.2 Malachy Postlethwayt's Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce, the first

section of which was published in I75 i, condemned the Company

in language reminiscent of Dobbs' most abrasive attacks, and

ignored the counter-arguments produced by the Company before
the Commons.3 In 1752 appeared the first book which reflected
first-hand knowledge of the Company's employ, Joseph Robson's Account of Six Years Residence in Hudson's-Bay. With its
stories of oppressive behaviour by the Company factors in the
Bay, details of inefficiency in the construction of the massive stone

fortress at the Company's most northerly post at Churchill, and
criticisms of commercial practices, the book had an authentic
ring, 'honest and just' as one reviewer termed it.4 In one cutting
remark it summarized the entire case of the critics: 'The Company
have for eighty years slept at the edge of a frozen sea'.5 Recent
1 Josiah Tucker, A BriefEssay on the Advantages and Disadvantages which
respectively attend France and Great Britain with regard to Trade (London,
1750), p. 41.
2 See R. L. Schuyler (ed.), Josiah Tucker: A Selection from his Economic
and Political Writings (New York, 1931), pp. 166-79.
3 Malachy Postlethwayt, Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce

Translated from the French ... of... Monsieur Savary ... with large additions (London, 1751-5), i. 957-61.
4 The Monthly Review (London, I752), vii. 75.
5 Joseph Robson, An Account of Six Years Residence in Hudson's-Bay,
from z y33 to zy_36, and Z744 to 1747 (London, 1752), p. 6.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

I66 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY
investigation has shown that Dobbs wrote much of the book, and
that the whole work was set on foot by him to 'further expose the

management of the Company'.' Thus, when Postlethwayt cited
Robson in support of Dobbs' earlier arguments he was unwittingly using Dobbs to confirm Dobbs!

The Company's reaction to these repeated criticisms is not
easy to assess. Certainly it now began to make more determined
efforts to move inland. The 1750's saw the first serious reconnaissance probes into the interior for several decades, and they
were to prove important steps in an expansion of trade which by
the end of the century had taken the Company to within sight of
the Rockies. But this forward policy was forced on it by the
reality of the situation in North America, where the westward
thrust of the Canadian fur-traders, both before and after the con-

quest of New France, threatened to stifle the Company's trade at

its point of origin. Even so, expansion was a gradual process.
Despite urgings from some of its officers in the Bay the Company

did not establish permanent posts deep inland until the 1770's.
Its new sensitivity can be seen more easily in specific projects of

exploration it set on foot in order to meet the allegations of
inertia from its critics. The interest in Labrador shown by the
Parliamentary Committee in 1749, and by the London merchants
in i752, hastened the Company's efforts to explore and exploit
that forbidding land.2 The continued rumours in England of the
existence of a Northwest Passage helped to prompt surveys of the
west coast of Hudson Bay by Company men in the 1760's.3 The
criticisms of the Company made by Alexander Cluny in his book
The American Traveller, published in 1769, had much to do with
the timing, if not the concept, of Samuel Hearne's remarkable
journey from Hudson Bay to the Arctic Ocean in I77I-2.4
This activity was not at first accompanied by any awareness
1 See Glyndwr Williams, 'Arthur Dobbs and Joseph Robson: New Light
on the Relationship between Two Early Critics of the Hudson's Bay Company', Canadian Historical Review, xl (1959), 132-6.

2 See K. G. Davies and A. M. Johnson (eds.), Northern Quebec and

Labrador Journals and Correspondence z 8 19-35 (London, The Hudson's Bay
Record Society, 1963), pp. xxii-iii.
3 See Williams, Northwest Passage, ch. VI.

4 See Richard Glover (ed.), A Journey from Prince of Wales's Fort in
Hudson's Bay to the Northern Ocean z y69, z7 yo, z yy7, t 772 by Samuel
Hearne (Toronto, i958), p. lxx. Cluny's schemes were even more pro-

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 167
that publicity had its advantages as well as its perils. The Company made no attempt to answer its detractors, and its official
attitude remained that summed up in a Committee member's

laconic reply to Dobbs' accusation that the Company never
printed any of its journals or charts: 'It would have been imprudent for the Company to have published them.'1 The documents
wrung from it during the Parliamentary investigation of 1749,
and its short printed Case of the Hudon's Bay Company of the
same year, remained its only public contribution to knowledge in
England of the Bay region and its trade. The painstaking efforts
of its servants to answer in their journals and letters the challenge

of Dobbs and the other critics reached the Company's offices in
Fenchurch Street, and went no farther. Until the last decade of the

eighteenth century publications on Hudson Bay were the undisputed preserve of the Company's armchair critics and disgruntled
ex-servants.

The Company's reluctance to reveal details of its

doubtless stemmed from its continuing concern that ri

benefit, but as time passed it abandoned the attemp

secrecy. While remaining indifferent to the clamour of
teers and hack-writers, it began to admit its responsibi
world of science. The changing attitude in the second h
century was personified by Samuel Wegg, whose Gove
marked the only serious break during the eighteenth c

the long dominance of the London Committee by

family.2 A stockholder since 1748, Wegg was elected to
mittee in 1760, became Deputy-Governor in 1774, and

digious than those of Dobbs. He advocated large-scale settlem
Hudson Bay, with no fewer than twelve separate colonies, and t

ment of a whale-fishery to employ eight hundred vessels and sixte

men! Despite the evidence produced in 1749 he could write of t
that 'they have long reaped, and do still reap a Profit, which a

Times as large could not produce in any other Channel of C

[A. Cluny], The American Traveller: or, Observations on the pr
culture and commerce of the British Colonies in America ... B
experienced Trader (London, 1769), p. 19.
1 Dobbs, Short State, annotation on p. 5.

2 Even so, Sir James Winter Lake was Deputy-Governor th
Wegg's Governorship. Between 171o and 1807 there were only
(1743-6 and 176o-5) when a member of the Lake family was
Governor or Deputy Governor.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

I68 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

from 1780 until his retirement in 1799. At the same time Weg
was a Fellow of the Royal Society, a member of its Council fro

1767, and Vice-President and Treasurer from 1772. He was
easy terms with many of the geographers, naturalists and explorers of his day, and gave the Admiralty and various privat

individuals access to Company journals and maps. Under h

more relaxed rule the public image of the Company perceptib
changed, and this at a time when the end of French rule in Canada

had removed some of the sting from earlier criticisms. Althoug
many books continued to repeat, almost mechanically, the criti
cisms of the Dobbs era, it was of more significance that Adam

Smith wrote in favour of the Company. Even though mon

polies in general he considered on a level with 'other mean and
malignant expedients of the mercantile system', he appreciate
the problems of a small organization trading into a region whe
natural difficulties excluded individual traders. Under these cir-

cumstances, he wrote, the Hudson's Bay Company approach
'very nearly to the nature of a private copartnery, and may b

capable of nearly the same degree of vigilance and attention.'1
The first signs of the new attitude came in the permission
granted by the Company in 1767 to the Royal Society to send
scientists to the trading post at Churchill in order to observe t
transit of the planet Venus in 1769. The Society's records show
that Wegg acted as an intermediary,2 and this first contact wa

followed by others. In the i770's a steady flow of natural histo

specimens and notes, meteorological observations and othe

scientific data went from the Bay posts to the Royal Society. I
return the Society presented scientific instruments to the Com
pany, and on more than one occasion expressed its gratitude 'fo
their considerable and repeated benefactions... their readiness

upon this end and all other occasions to promote science
general, and particularly the knowledge of natural history
Articles on the Hudson Bay specimens were printed in th
Society's Philosophical Transactions, and when in 1784 th
naturalist Thomas Pennant published his Arctic Zoology

1xAdam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth o
Nations, reprinted from the 6th edn. with an introduction by W. R. Scot

(London, 1921), ii. 265.
2 See Council Minutes of the Royal Society, Bk. V (1763-68), pp. I87 f
3 Ibid., Bk. VI (1769-82), pp. 121, 206.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 169
acknowledged its heavy dependence on the specimens and information provided by Hudson's Bay Company men.
In the field of exploration, potentially a much touchier subject,
Wegg and the Committee again showed themselves more accommodating than the Company in an earlier period. At the time of
Cook's third voyage to search for the Pacific entrance of the
Northwest Passage, Wegg sent the Earl of Sandwich, First Lord
of the Admiralty, the vital evidence of Hearne's journey and the

Company's seaborne explorations of the I76o's.x The official

account of Cook's last expedition stressed the importance of these
Company explorations, a novelty not overlooked by reviewers.
As The Monthly Review noted:

Formerly great complaints were made against this Company,
on account of their neglecting to prosecute voyages of dis-

covery.., .but it must be acknowledged that the present
Governor and Committee have made ample amends for the
narrow prejudices of their predecessors: as they have not only
done every thing in their power towards obtaining a perfect
knowledge of those parts themselves, but have, on the present
occasion, most liberally and readily contributed every thing
that could be required of them towards making that knowledge
public and useful.2

The same periodical pounced on Cook's old adversary, J. R.
Forster, three years later, and accused him of relying on Dobbs
and Ellis for material on the Hudson's Bay Company used in his
History of the Voyages and Discoveries made in the North, and so
repeating 'all the absurd stories, whimsical reveries, and extravagant opinions, with which these Authors have endeavoured to
mislead their readers.'3
As British interest in northwest America intensified after the
return of Cook's men, the records of the Hudson's Bay Company

became increasingly in demand. That ebullient if erratic geographer, Alexander Dalrymple, was given a free run of the Com-

pany's documents on exploration by Wegg. He examined the
1 See James Cook and James King, A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean...
(London, 1784), i.
2 The Monthly Review (London, 1784), lxx. 462. See also The Critical
Review (London, 1784), Iviii. 88.
3 The Monthly Review (London, 1787), lxxvii. 292.

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

170 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY

maps and journals sent home from the Bay, and persuaded himself
that there was still a possibility of a Northwest Passage, which
when discovered might link the trading operations of the Hud-

son's Bay Company and East India Company. His request to

Wegg to send an expedition to the Bay was agreed, on condition
that the government would nominate its commander, so 'that the
public may be assured of everything being done to effect the
desired purpose'? This caution was the more necessary since some
painful reminders of the Dobbs crisis had surfaced once more.
1790 saw the publication of a book of venomous criticism of the
Company by one of its former servants;2 there were allegations
that the Company was concealing the existence of a Northwest
Passage;3 most worrying of all, reports were reaching the Company that its chief Canadian rival, the North West Company, was
hoping to convince the government that its own explorations
entitled it to an exclusive trade in the north-west.4 The Company's

reaction to these dangers was no longer an instinctive clampdown on information: instead the London Committee took care

that the press knew about the forthcoming discovery voyage, and
it arranged for an account to be published after the expedition's
return.5 In a more general way, it continued its policy of opening
its records to reputable investigators. The cartographer Aaron

Arrowsmith was allowed access, and successive editions of his
splendid Map Exhibiting all the New Discoveries in the Interior
Parts of North America were dedicated to the Hudson's Bay
Company 'In testimony of their liberal Communications'. In the

training and use of explorers capable of making accurate surveys
the Company was well ahead of its more dashing and flamboyant

competitors, and it was anxious to publicize this fact. As Dalrymple wrote: '. .. if ever a charge could have been made with
justice against that Company for mysterious concealment, nothing of this nature can be imputed to the Present Managers'.6 The
1 C.O. 42/72, p. 515.
2 Edward Umfreville, The Present State ofHudson's Bay (London, 1790).
On Umfreville see Dr Richard Glover's comments in Glyndwr Williams
(ed.), Andrew Graham's Observations on Hudson's Bay z 76y-z79 z (London, Hudson's Bay Record Society, 1969), pp. xxx-xxxiii.
3 HBC C.7/I3, fo. I.
4 C.O. 42/72, P. 555.
5 HBC C.7/13, fo. Id.
6 Alexander Dalrymple, A Plan for Promoting the Fur-Trade, and Securing

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE HUDSON BAY COMPANY AND ITS CRITICS 171

Company put no difficulties in Hearne's way when he soug
consult his original journals in connection with the account
explorations which he was preparing for publication, and
this co-operation paid dividends. Hearne stoutly defended h
employers against the 'notorious absurdities' of their critic
stressed the encouragement he had been given to carry ou
explorations.1 The changing climate of knowledgeable opi
about the Company was indicated in the first sentence of a
of Hearne's book which noted that 'our readers are no str
to the merits of Mr Hearne in the line of discovery, or t

exertions of his employers, the Hudson's bay compan

promoting discoveries, or to the misrepresentations of the
travellers and navigators.'2

The achievement of Samuel Wegg was that he helped

Company of his day to distinguish between information
because of its commercial importance was properly confide
and that which was not. Under his guidance the Company b
goodwill instead of needless antagonism; it showed itself to
the ranks of those seeking to increase both trade and know
In North America its future was more than ever uncertain
became locked in combat with its Canadian rivals. The charter
was no longer attacked-it was simply ignored by the traders who
inherited the old French routes west from Montreal and pushed
on towards the Pacific. The Company's fate would depend in the
last resort on its effectiveness as a trading organization, not on the

polite assistance it had rendered the geographers, scientists and
ministers of the day; but in a struggle in which financial backing

in Britain was as important as events in North America its
improved standing was to help it survive the long years of rivalry
and war it now faced.

Queen Mary College, London
it to this Country, by Uniting the Operations of the East-India and Hudson's-

Bay Companys (London, 1789), preface.
1 Glover, Journey by Samuel Hearne, pp. Iviii, lxiv-lxxi.
2 The Gentleman's Magazine (London, 1796), lxvi. 497-

This content downloaded from
192.30.202.8 on Fri, 16 Jul 2021 02:18:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


