---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Nationhood
Title: The Indigenous right to say no
Author: Pam Palmater
Date: Fri, 12 Oct 2018 05:15:00 -0400
Link: http://indigenousnationhood.blogspot.com/2018/10/the-indigenous-right-to-say-no.html
 
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
 
(photo by Michelle Girouard)
 
 
This article was originally published by The Lawyer’s Daily on October 12, 2018.
 
 
The federal government recently announced that it will not appeal the court 
decision which quashed Canada’s approval of the Trans Mountain pipeline 
expansion. Instead, Canada will engage with the 117 impacted First Nations in a 
consultation process led by former Supreme Court of Canada Justice Frank 
Iacobucci.
 
 
If ever there was a sign that the government was going to force this pipeline 
expansion through the review process, this is it. After all, federal elections 
are just around the corner and Liberal Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has become 
the face of the Trans Mountain pipeline dispute and all the broken promises that
it entails.
 
 
Being criticized from all sides — the provinces, industry, Canadians and 
Indigenous peoples, and now the Federal Court of Appeal — Trudeau decided to 
bring out the big guns: Iacobucci.
 
 
There is little doubt that he was engaged to lead this process to ensure that 
the technical aspects of consultations are met, thus insulating the government 
from an appeal of its decision. Even the most trusting person would be hard 
pressed to believe that the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) would hear an appeal 
about Iacobucci’s consultation process let alone consider it in a truly neutral 
fashion.
 
 
Even if I am wrong about this, what kind of message does this send to First 
Nations who have been taking their cases to the SCC in the hopes of fair and 
impartial consideration for decades? Will they now wonder if their cases will be
heard by justices who, after they retire will work with governments against 
their interests?
 
 
Remember that conflict of interest is not only the presence of an actual 
conflict, but also reflects the appearance of conflict. Justice Canada describes
judicial independence as the “cornerstone of the Canadian judicial system” and 
refers to the clear separation of government and the courts. While some might 
argue he is no longer a sitting justice and may be perfectly legal and ethical 
according to the rules of ethics of the federal government and even law 
societies — it still doesn’t feel right. In law school, we learned that lawyers 
are duty bound to uphold the honour of the legal profession while at work and in
our personal lives — even after retirement.
 
 
To my mind, Iacobucci carries with him the honour of Canada’s highest court in 
all his actions, even after retirement. While this may not be a legal ethic 
issue, it is certainly a moral one. With all due respect, joining the federal 
side of this pipeline dispute feels a lot like taking sides against First 
Nations. It feels like a betrayal.
 
 
This is a similar story of betrayal that many First Nations feel when the RCMP 
takes the side of government in every single conflict between government laws 
and Aboriginal rights. The mandate of the RCMP is to not only prevent crimes and
maintain peace and order, but also enforce laws.
 
 
According to Canadian law, the Constitution is the highest law in the land. In 
theory, First Nations should be able to seek the assistance of the RCMP to 
protect their constitutional rights from being breached by governments or 
industry. Instead, the RCMP seems to always abide by the will of government and 
stop us from exercising our rights and/or provide physical protection and 
security for the extractive industry to allow them to breach our rights.
 
 
The government is using these national institutions, the RCMP and the courts, 
against us to force the expansion of this pipeline. The RCMP arrested land and 
water defenders in B.C. and now a former SCC justice will be used to insulate 
Trudeau’s future approval of the pipeline expansion.
 
 
Therein lies the real injustice of this process. Regardless of whether the new 
consultations are led by a former SCC justice or Trudeau himself, Canada has 
already decided that the pipeline will be built, before ever talking to any of 
the impacted First Nations, including those that have asserted Aboriginal title.
This renders our constitutionally protected Aboriginal rights meaningless. What 
legal value is the federal government’s constitutional obligation to consult, 
accommodate and obtain the consent of First Nations before taking actions that 
would impact our rights and title, if “consent” is interpreted as the right to 
say yes but excludes the right to say no? It makes no logical sense to interpret
the law in such a way, especially to a constitutionally protected right.
 
 
Imagine if consent was interpreted this way in both the ordinary and legal 
understanding of the word consent. When a school sends home a permission form 
seeking a parent’s consent to allow their child to take a field trip, if the 
parent does not give consent, the school cannot allow the child to participate. 
Similarly, if a patient refuses to give consent to an operation to have their 
hip replaced, then the doctor cannot perform the operation. The absence of 
consent means no — in other words, a veto that has real legal power and meaning.
Imagine if consent was interpreted in this illogical and diminished manner for 
sexual relations as it is for Aboriginal rights. Imagine if sexual consent in 
law meant that a man could consult with the woman on whether she wanted sexual 
relations, and was even willing to accommodate (“where appropriate”) her wishes 
about how to have sexual relations, but she had no right to say no — no veto 
over whether or not sexual relations occurred? That is called sexual assault and
it is a crime.
 
 
The greatest injustices that have ever been committed against First Nations in 
Canada have resulted from denying the sovereign right of our Nations to say no. 
The right to have a real veto over infecting our blankets with smallpox; from 
scalping our people; from stealing our children and raping, murdering and 
torturing them in residential schools; sterilizing our women and girls; from the
forced adoptions of our children into white families during the Sixties Scoop; 
to the murders and disappearances of our women and girls; to forced human 
trafficking and now the destruction of our lands and waters for profit.
 
 
The right to say no is an inherent part of the legal concept of consent. To 
interpret this concept otherwise is racist, discriminatory and self-serving, not
unlike the doctrines of discovery and terra nullius. Surely, even the SCC would 
not interpret their own decisions in such an impoverished manner. To do so would
render s. 35 an empty shell of a constitutional promise.
 
 
No former SCC justice should take part in such an exercise as between Canada and
First Nations. I think the honourable thing for the former justice to do would 
be to withdraw from the process. It might just help even the playing field in a 
game which is already skewed by a major imbalance of power.
 
 
The link to the original article published by The Lawyer's Daily on October 12, 
2018
 
https://www.thelawyersdaily.ca/articles/7537/the-indigenous-right-to-say-no-pame
la-palmater?category=opinion[3]
 
 
We should also be able to exercise our right to say no to Trudeau's proposed 
legislative framework that will impact our rights:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c7Z3579b20c&t=2s[4]
 
 
 
 
Links: 
[1]: https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-oCbo0YQgFuY/W8DIcZ-DCGI/AAAAAAAAAXo/Rnp-xoQ08GUehYe_Ay4DcCNKotpTZjk_wCLcBGAs/s1600/pam%2B-%2Bphoto%2Bby%2Bmichelle%2Bgirouard.jpg (link)
[2]: https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-oCbo0YQgFuY/W8DIcZ-DCGI/AAAAAAAAAXo/Rnp-xoQ08GUehYe_Ay4DcCNKotpTZjk_wCLcBGAs/s320/pam%2B-%2Bphoto%2Bby%2Bmichelle%2Bgirouard.jpg (image)
[3]: https://www.thelawyersdaily.ca/articles/7537/the-indigenous-right-to-say-no-pamela-palmater?category=opinion (link)
[4]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c7Z3579b20c&t=2s (link)

